
--- START unit-6 ---


Video 1: malware  
In this section of the course, 
we're going to be covering malware. 
So what exactly is malware? 
Well, malware is a shorthand way 
of talking about malicious software. 
Malware is really any software that is designed 
to infiltr  ate a computer system and possibly damage it 
without the user's knowledge or consent. 
When I think of malware, I like to think about it 
as a broad category of software code that includes a lot 
of bad things that are out there 
on the internet that can harm our computers, 
things like viruses, worms, Trojans, ransomware, spyware, 
rootkits, spam, and much more. 
But for the malware to infect your system, 
it needs to be able to create a threat vector 
and an attack vector. 
Now, a threat vector is a specific method used 
by an attacker to infiltr  ate a victim system. 
Now, some examples 
of threat vectors include unpatched software, 
installing code using a USB thumb drive, 
a phishing campaign where one of your users clicks 
on a link to install some kind 
of malware into your system and many other vulnerabilities 
and exploits that can be taken advantage of. 
Now, the second thing the attacker needs 
in order to infiltr  ate your system is what's known 
as an attack vector. 
An attack vector is the means 
by which the attacker is going to gain access 
to that computer 
in order to infect your system with malware. 
Now, I know these two terms sound pretty similar 
but there is a distinct difference between them. 
When we talk about a threat vector, we are focused 
on how the attacker plans to break into a given system. 
But when we talk about the attack vector, we're talking 

about both the way the attacker might get into your system 
and how they're going to infect that system. 
Now, let me provide you with a silly example 
to hopefully clarify this concept a little bit. 
Let's pretend for a moment that your house 
is going to be our computer 
and I have a cupcake and I want to represent that as malware 
or malicious software, and I want to put that inside 
of your house or inside of your computer. 
Now, my job as the attacker is to get my cupcake 
from my house over to your house 
and onto your kitchen table. 
If I can do that, we're going to say that I was successful 
in my cupcake infiltr  ation attack in this scenario 
and I've infected your house 
with this malware or this cupcake. 
So your job now 
as a cybersecurity professional is to stop me 
from getting that cupcake 
onto your kitchen table or in the real world, 
you want to stop me from infecting your system with malware. 
Now, the threat vector that I might choose could be 
to drive right up to your house 
because maybe your house isn't inside of a gated community 
with a security guard patrolling the streets. 
So you have a very unhardened system that might make it easy 
for me to infiltr  ate and get into your house. 
Now, in this example, that unguarded neighborhood 
would be considered our threat vector. 
Now, I know I can drive right over to your house 
but I still need to determine the attack vector 
that I'm going to use to get inside the house 
and that way I can put my cupcake, 
this malware, onto your kitchen table. 
Now, if I decide that I want to walk up to your front door, 
pick your lock and enter your house to place the cupcake 
on your kitchen table, that entire sequence 
of actions from walking to the door, picking the lock 
and entering the home would be considered my attack vector. 

That's the difference 
between the threat vector and the attack vector. 
It's the vulnerabilities that could be exploited 
and the way that they're actually going to be exploited. 
Now, let's go back to the world of computers 
for a moment. 
Let's pretend that you have an older computer 
that's running Windows 10 
and you haven't bothered installing 
or downloading the latest security patches 
because you've just been busy and you haven't had time to. 
Well, maybe it's been a really long time 
since you've installed those patches, 
that it's been three months or six months, or 12 months, 
and now you have a computer 
that is missing a critical security patch, 
like the MS17-010 security patch 
from Microsoft that came out all the way back in 2017 
to patch the EternalBlue vulnerability. 
Now, this unpatched vulnerability represents a threat vector 
but I still don't have an attack vector quite yet. 
Now, as an attacker, my goal is to infect as many systems 
as possible using this vulnerability. 
That way I can gain access to all of them. 
So I'm going to sit here all day scanning the internet 
and try to identify any unpatched computers that are online. 
And once I do that, I can then attack that system 
because that missing security patch is going to be vulnerable 
for that system 
and I already have a known exploit that I can plug 
against your system to be able to break in because the file 
and printer services that operate over the SMB Protocol 
are vulnerable on your system 
because you're missing that security patch. 
Now, once I find this vulnerable computer, 
I can run this exploit to gain access 
to the vulnerable machine 
and install some kind of malware on it. 
This entire series of events I just talked about 

can now be referred simply as my attack vector. 
This attack vector is the exact same one 
that was used widely by the WannaCry ransomware 
to wreak havoc across the internet. 
With the WannaCry ransomware, 
the attackers ran automated scans all day 
and all night to find as many unpatched Windows machines 
running Windows 7, Windows 8, Windows 8.1, and Windows 10. 
And when they found those systems 
that were missing that patch, MS17-010 dash, 
they ran an exploit against it 
to gain administrative rights over that system. 
Then they would encrypt the user's files 
and display a message on the user's screen 
saying your computer is locked, and if you want to access it, 
you're going to pay us X amount 
of Bitcoin for that decryption key. 
So as we go through this section of the course, 
we're going to be focused on the different types of malware, 
the different infection vectors 
and how to prevent malware from infecting your systems. 
Our focus is solely going to be 
on domain two inside of this section 
and we'll be singularly focused on objective 2.4. 
Now, objective 2.4 states that given a scenario, 
you must be able to analyze indicators 
of malicious activity, and then it goes on 
to list all the different types 
of malware attacks that you need to know for the exam. 
First, we're going to be covering viruses. 
A computer virus is a malicious software 
that attaches itself to a clean file 
and spreads throughout a computer system, 
often corrupting or damaging the host files in the process. 
Next, we'll discuss worms. 
Now, worms are standalone pieces of malware 
that replicate themself and spread to other computers 
that often exploit software vulnerabilities 
to propagate themselves across a network. 

Then we'll talk about Trojans. 
Trojans are malicious programs that disguise themself 
as legitimate software, but when they're executed, 
they grant the attackers unauthorized access 
to the victim's system. 
After that, we'll look at how easy it is 
to create a virus to infect a system 
and how an attack can be remotely controlled with a computer 
by using a remote access Trojan known as a RAT. 
Next, we're going to be looking at ransomware. 
Now, ransomware is a type 
of malware that encrypts the user's data 
and holds it hostage until the ransom is paid 
to the attacker for that decryption key. 
After that, we'll talk 
about the world of zombies and botnets. 
Zombies are compromised computers 
that are remotely controlled 
by attackers and are often used 
in coordination with other zombies to form a botnet. 
A botnet is a network 
of compromised computers that are controlled 
by an attacker and are often used for distributed denial 
of service attacks, spam distribution 
or crypto mining operations. 
Then we'll discuss rootkits. 
And rootkits are malicious tools that hide their presence 
and activities on a computer 
and they often operate at the operating system 
or below the operating system level to be able 
to have ongoing privileged access to that system. 
Next, we'll explore backdoors and logic bombs. 
Backdoors are malicious means 
of bypassing normal authentication processes 
in order to gain unauthorized access 
to a system which are often going to be implanted 
by malware or during an attack by a threat actor. 
Logic bombs, on the other hand, 
are pieces of embedded code that's placed inside 

of a legitimate program 
and can be executing a malicious action 
whenever a specific condition or trigger occurs. 
Then we'll cover keyloggers. 
Keyloggers are stealthy tools 
or malware variants that record a user's keystrokes 
and are often used to capture passwords 
and other sensitive information on a victimized system. 
After that, we'll discuss spyware and bloatware. 
Spyware is software that secretly monitors 
and gathers user information on a system or its activities 
and then sends that data 
to third parties without the user's knowledge or consent. 
Bloatware, on the other hand, 
refers to unnecessary or pre-installed software 
on devices that are often going to be consuming 
your system resources and space 
without offering any value to you in return. 
Next, we'll cover some malware attack techniques 
and infection vectors. 
Malware exploitation techniques involve methods 
by which malware can infiltr  ate and infect a targeted system 
and have been evolving from file-based tactics 
to modern fir eless techniques that leave 
behind minimal traces on an infected machine. 
These advanced malwares are often going to use 
multi-stage deployments 
that leverage your own built-in system tools 
and various obfuscation techniques to challenge us 
as cybersecurity professionals 
as we're attempting to detect 
and counteract these different types of malware. 
Then we'll explore various indications 
of a successful malware attack. 
And every cybersecurity professional needs 
to be able to recognize the indications of malware attacks, 
including account lockouts, concurrent session utilization, 
blocked content, impossible travel, resource consumption, 
resource inaccessibility, out-of-cycle logging, 

missing logs, and documented attacks 
in order to better secure your enterprise networks. 
Now, finally , we're going to take a short quiz 
to see what you learned in this section of the course 
and review each of those quiz questions fully 
to ensure you can explain why each answer was right. 
So if you're ready, let's get started 
with our coverage of malware in this section of the course. 
 
Video 2: viruses 
 
In this lesson, we're going to explore viruses. 
Now, a computer virus is simply made up of malicious code 
that's run on a machine without the user's knowledge 
and this allows the code to infect the computer 
whenever it's been run. 
So what does this look like out in the real world? 
Well, maybe you're going to download 
a new video game from a website 
and when you download that installation file inside of it, 
there may have been some malicious code. 
Now, whenever you run the program to install it, 
you're actually allowing the code to be installed 
on your machine, and that virus can now take hold. 
At this point, the virus is going to want to reproduce 
and spread across the network, 
and it does this because you have taken 
some kind of user action, 
and in this case it was you installing the program 
and allowing that code to be run so that the virus 
can now start performing some malicious activities, 
including replicating across your network, 
deleting your critical files, 
and using a valuable computing resources 
within your systems. 
Now, there are 10 different types of viruses 
that you should be aware of, 
including boot sector, macro program, multipartite, 
encrypted, polymorphic, metamorphic, stealth, 

armor, and hoax viruses. 
Now, first, we have a boot sector virus. 
A boot sector virus is one that is going to be stored 
in the first sector of a hard disk or solid state device 
and is then loaded into memory 
whenever that can computer boots up. 
These boot sector viruses 
are actually very difficult to detect 
because they're installed 
before your operating system boots up 
and so it's able to hide itself from anti-virus 
that you may have installed inside your Windows, Linux, 
or Mac computer. 
To find and remove these types of viruses, 
you do need to use an anti-virus 
that specifically looks for boot sector viruses, 
and these usually are going to be run 
from a network anti-virus scanning engine 
or from an anti-virus that can be loaded 
from a Linux live boot disc. 
Second, we have a macro virus. 
Now, macros are a form of code 
that allows a virus to be embedded inside another document 
so that when that document is open by the user, 
the virus will then be executed. 
The most common examples of macros 
are the ones that are found inside 
of Microsoft Word documents, Microsoft Excel spreadsheets, 
and Microsoft PowerPoint presentations. 
By default, macros themself aren't actually malicious. 
In fact, macros are commonly used 
as a way for you to add specific functionality 
to your different documents, spreadsheets, and presentations 
without needing to create an entire program 
or application to do it. 
For example, I have a macro that I use 
inside of Microsoft Excel 
that allows me to do quicker calculations. 
Now, in my case, that piece of code works properly 

and is safe and secure to use, 
but just because we have the ability to add these codes 
to our office documents, 
it also means that threat actors can add code 
to those documents too, including malicious code 
into these types of documents, spreadsheets and PowerPoints 
and then try to trick a user into opening those documents 
by using social engineering techniques. 
Third, we have a program virus. 
Now program viruses try to find executables 
or application files to infect with their malicious code. 
For example, if you accidentally opened a program virus 
while browsing the internet, 
it can try to install itself into one of your programs, 
like Microsoft Word, 
that's already installed on your computer. 
This way, every time you open up the infected application, 
in this case Microsoft Word, 
it will then infect your computer 
each and every time you open it up. 
This is why program viruses target programs or applications 
because that virus can reinfect the system time after time, 
anytime the user opens that compromised application. 
Fourth, we have a multipartite virus. 
Now, a multipartite virus is a combination 
of a boot sector type of virus and a program type of virus. 
By using this combination, 
the virus can actually place itself in the boot sector 
and then get loaded up every time the computer boots, 
just like a boot sector virus would. 
Now, once it's loaded up at boot time, 
it can then install itself within a program 
where it can be run every time the computer starts up 
because that program is always started 
whenever the computer is booted up. 
Now, this allows a multipartite virus 
to maintain a persistence on your infected machine. 
And this way, even if a cybersecurity professional 
finds that program that's part of the virus 

and removes it from the system and cleans it out, 
they still may have missed the boot sector portion 
of that virus. 
And so the next time the user reboots 
their computer into Windows, 
that computer will get infected once more. 
Fifth, we have an encrypted virus. 
Now, an encrypted virus is designed to hide itself 
from being detected 
by encrypting its malicious code or payloads 
To avoid detection by any anti-virus software. 
Since the anti-virus providers are getting better and better 
all the time at understanding how viruses work, 
they actually can stop a lot of them a lot of the time 
from infecting our systems. 
But as the defenders get better, 
the attackers also get more creative 
in their infection methods. 
And so encrypted viruses make it harder 
for anti-virus providers to find these types of viruses 
because the malicious code is scrambled into cipher text 
and it's unreadable to both the user 
and the anti-virus software. 
Sixth, we have polymorphic viruses. 
Now, a polymorphic virus is an advanced version 
of an encrypted virus, 
but instead of just encrypting the contents, 
it's actually going to change the virus's code 
each time it's executed by altering the decryption module 
in order for it to evade detection. 
Now, I know this sounds really complicated, 
but what it's really trying to do here 
is morph the way the code looks 
so that it's signature-based anti-virus applications 
are not going to be able to detect it as being malicious. 
Seventh, we have a metamorphic virus. 
Now, metamorphic viruses are able to write itself entirely 
before it attempts to infect a given file. 
Essentially, this is a more advanced version 

of a polymorphic virus. 
Eighth, we have stealth viruses. 
Now, a stealth virus isn't necessarily a type of virus 
as much as a technique that's used to prevent viruses 
from being detected by anti-virus software. 
Stealth viruses are using different techniques 
to avoid detection by an anti-virus software, 
including things like encrypting its contents, 
modifying its payload, and other methods to avoid detection. 
Ninth, we have armored viruses. 
Now, armored viruses have a layer of protection 
that confuse a program or a person 
who's trying to analyze it. 
This is yet another way that virus creators 
are trying to add in protections for their virus' code 
to increase their odds of being able to spread that virus 
to other users without being detected 
by your organization's security appliances 
or their anti-virus scanners. 
The 10th and final virus we have 
is what's known as a a hoax. 
Now, interestingly enough, a hoax technically isn't a virus, 
but instead, it's a form of technical social engineering 
that attempts to scare our end users 
into taking some kind of undesirable action on their system. 
For example, you may have seen a message 
or a website that pops up and claims that it's a message 
from the Microsoft Tech support team 
and that your machine has been infected by a virus 
or other type of malware, 
then they'll give you a few steps to follow 
to remove that infection. 
Unfortunately though, 
your computer was never actually infected in the first place 
when you got that message, 
but by following their actions, 
you actually will download and infect your computer 
with a virus. 
And this is what we're talking about 

when we talk about a virus hoax. 
Usually, a virus hoax is going to be used 
to make somebody think their computer is infected, 
but really, they're just trying to trick you 
into installing a virus on your system 
or to get you to pay them money 
to remove that supposed virus from your computer. 
Either way though, you should remember that a hoax 
isn't really a virus 
and you don't have a virus infection on your system, 
unless you actually follow the directions 
provided by that message or the popup, 
or you allow somebody else 
who's supposedly from tech support 
to remotely access your computer 
to provide virus remediation. 
Either way, this really is just a technical form 
of social engineering where the attacker 
is trying to trick you into giving them access 
or installing malicious programs on their behalf. 
So remember, a virus is simply made up of malicious code 
that's being run on a machine without the user's knowledge. 
This allows the code to infect the computer 
whenever it's been run, 
and there are 10 different types of viruses 
that you need to be aware of, 
including boot sector, macro, program, multipartite, 
encrypted, polymorphic, metamorphic, stealth, armor, 
and hoax viruses. 
Now, some modern viruses actually will combine 
multiple categories of these 
to create really powerful viruses, 
such as an encrypted, metamorphic, multipartite virus 
that is really going to grab a hold of your system 
and attempt to avoid detection by your security appliances 
and anti-virus software. 
So you should be aware of this as well. 
 
Video 3: worm 

In this lesson, 
we're going to explore computer worms. 
Now, a worm is a piece of malicious software, 
much like a virus, 
that can replicate itself without any user intervention. 
Now, the key difference here between a virus and a worm 
is that a virus requires a user to take some action 
such as opening a file, 
clicking on a malicious web link, 
or connecting a mass storage device to your system. 
But a worm, on the other hand, can actually replicate itself 
and spread throughout your network 
without a user's consent or their action. 
Now, this occurs because a worm 
will take advantage of vulnerabilities 
in our operating systems and applications 
if our organizations don't mitigate these vulnerabilities 
by selecting the appropriate security controls 
and performing appropriate security patching. 
So if a worm can scan your network 
and determine that one of your workstations 
is missing a security patch, 
that worm can take advantage of that vulnerability 
and then use it to spread from victim to victim 
across the network and across the world. 
Now, worms are very dangerous for two different reasons. 
First, they're dangerous because they can infect 
your workstation and other computing assets, 
but they're also really dangerous 
because they can cause disruption 
to your normal network traffic 
because they're constantly trying to replicate 
and spread themselves across the network. 
This begins to consume not just our network resources 
but also consumes compute power, processing power, 
memory power, and network capacity, 
which will slow down your system and your overall network. 
If the replication is occurring too rapidly, for example, 
this can actually cause a denial-of-service attack 

against your network and its associated servers. 
Now worms are best known for spreading far and wide 
over the internet in a relatively short amount of time. 
Even as far back as 2001, 
there was a worm named Nimda 
which is basically admin spelled backwards. 
Now, Nimda was able to propagate against the entire internet 
in just 22 minutes, which is really impressive, 
especially because most internet connections back then 
were extremely slow and relied upon dial-up modems. 
Now, there's another major worm that we saw back in 2009 
and this one was called Confick   er. 
Now, Confick   er was probably one of the largest worms 
that we've seen to date as cybersecurity professionals 
because it was able to infect 
between nine and 15 million machines. 
This worm was going through and infecting 
as many machines as it could find, 
and all these machines 
were missing a critical security patch 
for the Windows operating system 
specifically the Microsoft patch 
known as 08-067. 
Now, this security patch 
was designed to solve a software vulnerability 
inside the way Windows was doing file and printer sharing. 
Confick   er would actively scan every resource 
on an infected organization's internal network 
as well as across the internet. 
And whenever it found a machine 
without that security patch installed, 
it would then execute some malicious code 
to take over that infected machine 
and add it to a larger botnet 
that the attacker could then use 
for other malicious purposes. 
Now, luckily, cybersecurity professionals 
were able to shut down the attacker's botnet 
before it was used for any malicious or nefarious purposes. 

But Confick   er does show the true power 
of how far and wide these worms can spread 
especially when you're using an internet connected system. 
So remember, a worm is a piece of malicious software 
that can self replicate without any user interaction. 
This is the key difference between a virus and a worm 
because a virus requires some kind of user action 
like opening a file, clicking on a malicious web link, 
or connecting a malicious storage device to your system 
to cause the system to get infected in the first place. 
Worms, though, will simply continually search out 
a new network connection 
and scan any resources it finds 
to try and exploit some kind of known vulnerability 
in order to take over that machine and infect it 
as well as infecting your network 
 
Video 4: trojans 
 
In this lesson, 
we're going to take a look at Trojans. 
Now, before we dive into this piece of malware, 
let's look at history for a moment 
and learn what a Trojan actually is. 
Now, a couple of thousand years ago 
Greece and the city of Troy were at war. 
This lasted for about 10 years with no end in sight. 
After a long siege, the Greeks started getting restless 
and they decided they were going to try something different. 
So they went out and constructed a large wooden horse 
that they decided to give to the city of Troy 
as a peace offering. 
Now, unfortunately, for the citizens of Troy, 
this seemingly harmless gift was actually filled 
with Greek soldiers, 
and once it was wheeled safely into the city, 
the day turned to night 
and the soldiers came out from within that Trojan horse. 
This handful of soldiers then went over 

to the walled city's gates, unlocked them and opened them, 
and let the rest of the invading Greek army into the city 
which rapidly laid waste to the entire city of Troy. 
Now, this is where the term Trojan horse, 
or as we call it in cybersecurity, a Trojan, gets its name. 
Now, in cybersecurity 
Trojans work quite similarly to the gift horse 
delivered by the Greeks to the city of Troy. 
Now, a Trojan is simply a piece of malicious software 
that is disguised as a piece of harmless 
or desirable software. 
Basically, a Trojan claims it's going to perform 
some kind of needed or desired function for you 
and that Trojan will indeed perform that function, 
but it also performs a malicious one 
like installing a backdoor or virus 
onto your system as well. 
Now, when I was a kid back in the 1980s 
there was this great new game that came out called Tetris 
and everybody loved it. 
Now, Tetris was, and still is, an extremely popular game 
and everybody wanted to get a copy of it back in those days. 
But back then, 
we really didn't have the internet to download games, 
and so instead, you may have received a flopp y disk 
from your friend at school who had a copy of the game. 
Now, this became a common practice, and back in those days, 
people really weren't thinking about computer viruses 
the way we do today. 
Well, an attacker got this great idea 
of embedding some malicious code 
into the Tetris game and then passing out disks 
with that infected version to lots of different people. 
If you received one of those disks, 
you might put it in your computer in order to run the game, 
And when you did that, 
the game would actually play just like you thought it would, 
but what was actually happening 
behind the scenes was it opened a connection 

between your system and their system 
so the attacker could gain remote access 
and control over your system. 
Now, what I just described is one of the earliest examples 
of what we now refer to as a RAT, a Remote Access Trojan. 
Now, a RAT is a type of Trojan 
that's widely used by modern attackers 
because it provides the attacker with remote control 
of a victimized machine. 
Now, let's go back to that Tetris example, 
because young Jason found this to be a great way 
to mess around with his online friends. 
So I could go out and give a copy 
of this infected version of Tetris over to my friends, 
and when they started playing it, 
a remote connection would be created from their machine 
back to my machine. 
Now, once that connection was established 
I could do all sorts of things that I thought were hilarious 
on my friend's system, like logging in as them 
on their computer, opening and closing their CD drive, 
playing music or alerts on their computer, 
flipping their screen upside down 
so that everything appeared backwards or upside down, 
and all sorts of other weird things like that, 
all while maintaining remote access and remote control 
of my friends' computers by using this Trojan. 
Now, in my case, this was being done for fun 
against my friend's computers or later on in life, 
as part of my network penetration test 
that I was involved with over the years. 
So remember, when you're dealing with a Trojan 
you're dealing with a piece of malicious software 
that's disguised as a piece of harmless 
or desirable software. 
Trojans are commonly used by attackers 
to exploit a vulnerability in your workstation 
and then conduct data exfiltr  ation 
to steal your sensitive documents and create back doors 

to create persistence in your system 
and other malicious activities like that. 
So, anytime you download a program from the internet, 
you always need to be careful to check them for Trojans 
by using a good anti-virus or anti-malware solution 
prior to opening or installing any programs you download, 
as well as making sure your systems are patched 
against known vulnerabilities 
in order to prevent your system 
from falling victim to the attacks created by Trojans. 
 
Video 5: viruses and trojans 
 
In this lesson, 
I want to perform a quick demonstration to 
show you how easy it is to create 
and use a virus and remote access Trojan. 
Now, before we begin, it's important to note 
that I'm using an older, legacy style machine 
for this demonstration 
because these are known vulnerable Windows 7 machines 
that I'm using inside of my lab environment. 
Now, this is a great operating system to use 
for these types of security demonstrations, 
because they are vulnerable 
and there are no longer any new security patches 
for Windows 7 systems in existence. 
So if you're trying to replicate this demonstration 
on a more modern workstation like Windows 11 or Windows 10, 
it will usually be detected and blocked 
by your modern antivirus software like Windows Defender. 
But there are newer tools that are being developed 
by threat actors, attackers, and penetration testers 
all the time that you can use. 
Now, I've had many students ask 
where they can download a tool like JPS Virus Maker 
that I'm going to be using in this demo 
and you can find these things online. 
Now, because I did not create this tool 

and I don't own the copyright to it, 
I am not able to provide you a direct download link 
for this tool or tell you where you 
can actually go and download it. 
Making a virus is not considered a testable item 
for your exams, but I wanted to provide 
this quick demonstration so you can see 
what kind of things a virus and a Trojan can do 
once they've compromised your targeted system. 
Now, if you move into the world 
of penetration testing later on in your career, 
you'll learn all about the different tools that we use 
in modern networks to be able to create viruses 
and Trojans to be able to break 
into corporate networks as part 
of your penetration testing assessments and engagements. 
Alright, let's jump into the demonstration. 
So I have two machines set up here. 
I have one on the left, which will be my attacker 
and one on the right, which will be my victim. 
On the attacker's machine, 
I'm running a program called Virus Maker 3.0, or JPS. 
Here is basically a point and click options 
of all the things that I can do 
to that machine on the right. 
For our example, I'm going to do one 
that's easy to see, it's called Crazy Mouse. 
So I'll go ahead and click that 
and then I'm going to select what do I want it 
to be called after installation. 
We'll go ahead and call it the service host. 
And what do we want the server name to be called? 
The file name, and I'm going to go ahead 
and call it Explorer.exe. 
You could really choose whatever you want. 
It just depends on how sneaky you're trying to be. 
Now, the next thing I'm going to do is 
I'm going to create that virus. 
At this point that has been created 

and saved to my downloads folder. 
Now at this point, I need my victim to be able 
to download this virus, and there's lots of ways 
to do that based on your social engineering, 
tying this virus into another program, 
using a spear phishing campaign, 
putting it as a rogue download, all sorts of things. 
For this particular example though, 
I'm just going to show you the effect 
if the person was able to download it 
and if they ran it. 
So at this point the user's been tricked, 
they've downloaded the file and now they run it 
because they think it's a game or whatever else it is. 
In this case, they think it's a picture. 
If we go ahead and run that, see what happens. 
And there you can see the mouse just starts 
going jumping all over the screen 
so that if I wanted to try to open something 
like the trash can I can't because every time I click on it, 
it jumps away someplace else. 
That's the idea of this very simple virus. 
It's just a nuisance, it's trying to cause 
a problem for them. 
Now, let me show you an example 
of what a remote access Trojan or RAT looks like. 
Now, on the left is my attacking machine 
and on the right is my victim machine. 
So I'm using a program called ProRat. 
So the first thing I want to do is create a ProRat server. 
I'm going to click on General Settings 
and from here you can see the port 
it's going to operate on: 5110, 
which I can change to anything I want. 
The server password in this case, 12345. 
Again, not very secure, 
but for our lab purposes it's just fine. 
And then the victim's name if we have it. 
From here we can give them error messages, 

we can melt the server on install 
which means once the Pro Rat has 
been installed on the victim computer, 
it will delete itself while still maintaining a connection. 
We can kill the antivirus and the fir ewall on start, 
we can disable Security Center 
and all sorts of other things like that. 
I'm going to go ahead and give a fake error message 
here saying "You have been hacked." 
Now, normally you wouldn't want to send a message 
to your user showing that they've been hacked, 
but I just want to show it to you for demonstration purposes. 
Maybe you're doing this as a ransomware 
and you've encrypted their files. 
This is a way to send them a message saying 
"You need to pay me if you want access to it." 
And from there we'll just go down 
and we can go ahead and hit Create Server. 
From there, the server is going to be created for us. 
Go ahead and hit OK. 
So if we want to be a little trickier, 
we're going to go ahead and bind it with a file. 
So we're going to select a picture, 
in this case, the desert. 
Go ahead and hit Open on that 
and then we're going to give it another server extension here. 
We want to call it EXE, SCR, COM, PIF or BAT. 
EXE will be just fine and for the icon, 
what do we want this to look like? 
Well, we want it to look like a photo, 
so we're going to go ahead and make it a JPEG. 
And then we can go ahead and hit Create the Server. 
And this is going to be in our current directory, 
so if I look back in my current directory 
I now have the binded server with a JPEG icon. 
And from here we can go ahead 
and rename it and let's call it "Desert". 
So now they think they're getting a photo of the desert. 
At this point, again, we would use some form 

of trickery or social engineering to get it to them 
and once we do, it'll be on their desktop. 
So at this point I've tricked the user 
and they now have the file. 
They're going to go ahead and open that file, 
and when they run that file, 
you're going to see the error message that we told it to have. 
There's the picture and "You have been hacked." 
Uh-oh, now what's going on? 
Let's go ahead onto our target machine 
and connect to that server that's now been installed. 
Again, we're going to use our password 12345, 
and at this point we now have access to that machine. 
We can find out information about it. 
In this case, if we go ahead and get the system information, 
I know now the computer name is Bob Sales. 
I know what kind of machine it is, 
it's using English for its language, 
System32 is its path, 
I find out what kind of users it has, 
I find out the date and time of the machine, 
all of that information. 
And if I close this on the right, 
that'll move out of the way. 
We can get all that information here 
from our attacking machine about our victim machine. 
We can also look at the last 25 websites they visited 
and maybe that would be something that would be helpful 
for us to be able to attack. 
We can take screenshots and we can actually open it 
and see what we're going to see. 
So if I do a screenshot, I see what's on their screen. 
So if they're on a website like Google here 
which is not going to connect 
'cause I'm in a live environment here 
that's disconnected from the machine, 
I'll go ahead and hit Snapshot and now I can see that. 
If they had a webcam, I could view their webcam. 
Again, I have lots of access to do whatever it is 

we want to do on this machine. 
I can send them messages if I want, 
so I can do a message and say Test. 
And it'll say, "I don't work for you anymore", 
so we're going to go ahead and send that over there. 
And there it is. 
"I'm sorry, I don't work for you anymore." 
And so you can see the power of a remote access tool, 
and so this allows me to do all sorts of different stuff. 
Again, I can take their files, 
I can mess with their registry, 
I can go through and look at all their files, 
I can FTP over and grab their files, 
I can chat over to them. 
I can do some funny stuff. 
Maybe it's my friend and I'm just trying 
to show them that I have access to their machine. 
For instance, I can hide their desktop icons, 
and now you should be able to see that that is gone. 
And I can show their icons and they're back. 
I can make the mouse go crazy and then I can fix it. 
I can flip their screen upside down and then I can fix it. 
So you can do all sorts of different things 
on this machine and take control and do whatever it is 
that we want because we have that remote access to them. 
I hope you found this demonstration insightful 
as you started to see what kind of effects a virus 
or a remote access Trojan can have on a victimized system 
 
Video 6: ransomware 
 
In this lesson, 
we're going to discuss the world of ransomware. 
Now, ransomware is the digital equivalent of kidnapping. 
But instead of focusing on people, 
we are focused on digital data and information assets. 
Let's imagine for a moment 
that somebody came over to your house today. 
They grabbed your child when you weren't home, 

and then they sent you a letter demanding $1 million 
for your child's safe return. 
This type of kidnapping is usually pretty successful 
because the victim's family will usually pay up 
to ensure the safe return of their child. 
Now, with this in mind, 
let's go back to the digital world 
and talk about ransomware, 
because ransomware is a type of malicious software 
that's designed to block access to a computer system 
or its data by encrypting it until a ransom is paid 
over to the attacker. 
Now, generally, ransomware will display a message 
to the victim that demands payment 
in exchange for a decryption key 
which can decrypt your data files. 
Some ransom amounts can be fairly low 
like a few hundred dollars 
if the attacker determines they have encrypted the files 
of an individual user system. 
But we've also seen demands in the multi-millions of dollars 
for large organizations 
that have become the victim of a ransomware attack. 
To really understand the scale 
and scope of this type of ransomware problem, 
let's just take a look 
at a relatively recent, high-profile incident, 
known as a Colonial Pipeline attack of 2021. 
Colonial Pipeline is a major US fuel company 
that fell victim to a ransomware attack 
that forced them to shut down their pipeline. 
Now, that doesn't sound so bad on the surface. 
But the problem here is 
that the Colonial Pipeline actually carries 
nearly half of the United States' fuel supply 
on the East Coast. 
Now, due to this ransomware attack 
that took over their systems, 
the company was unable to use their pipeline 

for fiv e straight days. 
This shutdown caused massive disruptions, 
which led to fuel shortages, panic buying, 
and a pretty large spike in gas prices. 
The attackers, known as the DarkSide, 
demanded and then received a ransom 
of approximately $4.4 million in Bitcoin 
to provide the decryption key for this attack. 
While the payment facilitated 
the recovery of some of the encrypted data, 
the attackers repercussions really fell 
across industries and households for weeks. 
Luckily, during the Colonial Pipeline ransom attack, 
nobody was seriously injured. 
But that isn't always the case. 
One of the most tragic real-world examples 
of a ransomware attack actually occurred 
at the University Hospital in Dusseldorf, Germany, 
back in September of 2020. 
Back then, the University Hospital, Dusseldorf, 
suffered a ransomware attack which crippled their systems. 
Because of the attack, 
the hospital's computer systems were disrupted, 
and they began to divert patients 
who required emergency treatment to other hospitals 
while the cybersecurity team was working 
to regain access to their systems and to restore their data. 
Now, among those patients who were being diverted was 
a woman who is suffering from a life-threatening condition. 
Due to the delay caused by rerouting her ambulance 
to another hospital because of that ransomware attack, 
this woman actually died 
making this the first death 
directly linked to a ransomware attack in a hospital. 
Now, German authorities launched an investigation. 
And if the attackers were caught, 
they could have faced charges of manslaughter 
in addition to cyber crime charges 
because somebody died as a result of the attack. 

The attackers claimed they did not intend 
to target the University Hospital system, 
but instead they were targeting 
the Heinrich Heine University. 
But they attacked the hospital by mistake. 
When they learned about the mistake 
and the severe consequences of their actions, 
they provide the decryption key to the hospital 
without demanding a future ransom. 
This ransomware attack really does underscore 
just how vulnerable critical infrastructure can be 
to a ransomware attack 
and the cascading consequences 
that these ransomware attacks can have 
on our society at large. 
So now that we understand the gravity of ransomware, 
how can we protect ourselves 
and our organizations against it? 
Personally, I recommend following 
four security best practices 
to prevent becoming the victim of a ransomware attack. 
These are conducting regular backups, 
installing regular software updates, 
providing security awareness training to your end users, 
and implementing multi-factor authentication 
for your systems. 
First, you should always conduct regular backups. 
One of the most effective ways to mitigate 
against the impact of a ransomware attack is 
to regularly back up 
all of your important data, files, and systems. 
These backups should be stored both on physical devices 
in your own on-premise data center, 
as well as the second backup 
conducted using cloud-based storage solutions 
to ensure that they're not connected 
to the main system that you're trying to protect. 
For example, if you only have one external hard drive 
connected to your system that serves as your backup, 

this device will be encrypted by the ransomware 
if your system is attacked as well. 
But by having cloud-based storage 
or an offsite disconnected storage solution available, 
you're going to have a full copy of your data 
if you need to restore those from backup 
because of a ransomware attack. 
Second, you should install software updates regularly. 
By regularly updating all of your software, 
especially your operating system and antivirus programs, 
you can prevent an attacker 
from being able to exploit vulnerabilities 
and outdated software and operating systems. 
For example, the WannaCry ransomware attacks 
of 2017 were able to successfully move 
around the globe pretty quickly 
because so many systems were missing 
a critical operating system patch for Windows 7, 
Windows 8, and Windows 10-based systems, 
which is known as MS17-010. 
If the system simply had this patch installed, 
it would've prevented the EternalBlue exploit 
from being successfully run against those systems 
as part of a future ransomware attack. 
Third, we need to provide security awareness training 
to our end users. 
Now, many of the most successful ransomware attacks 
were begun by an end user clicking on a link 
in a simple phishing email. 
Your users must always be skeptical of unsolicited emails, 
especially with those 
that have attachments or links in them, 
because they're often used as a common attack vector 
by malware, viruses, trojans, and ransomware. 
Bottom line, if something looks suspicious, 
your end users simply shouldn't click on it. 
Fourth, your organization should also implement 
multi-factor authentication. 
Now, multi-factor authentication, known as MFA, 

can be enabled on your authentication systems 
to provide an extra layer of security, 
which in turn makes it more difficult for attackers 
to breach your user accounts, 
install ransomware on your systems. 
So what do you do if you find yourself 
the victim of a ransomware attack? 
Well, first, you should never pay the ransom. 
While it may seem like the quickest way 
to get out of the situation, 
paying the ransom does not actually guarantee 
that you'll ever get your data back. 
Plus, paying the ransom does reward the attackers 
and their criminal behavior. 
It funds future attacks. 
And it can get you added 
as a person who pays up when they're attacked, 
which then encourages other attackers 
to try and compromise your systems a second time 
in order to get a second payment from you. 
Second, if you suspect ransomware has infected your machine, 
you should immediately disconnect it from the network. 
By isolating the affected machine from your network, 
you can prevent the spread of ransomware 
across the rest of your workstations and servers. 
Third, you should notify the authorities. 
Remember, a ransomware attack is considered a criminal event 
and they should be reported like the crime they are. 
Now reporting of ransomware attack can help authorities 
track down and apprehend the attackers too, which is great. 
But note, you should not make the decision 
to report the attack to the authorities on your own. 
If this happened inside your organization, 
you need to consult 
your organizational instant response processes 
because some organizations prefer 
to handle ransomware incidents internally 
without involving external law enforcement. 
And fourth, you should restore your data and systems 

from known good backups. 
If you're following the cybersecurity best practices 
and have been backing up your data to an offsite 
or offline environment, 
you're going to find that you can quickly 
and relatively easily restore your business operations 
using those backups. 
But you first need to ensure 
that the ransomware is completely removed from your systems 
before you restore your critical and sensitive data 
back onto those systems. 
Otherwise, they could get encrypted again. 
So remember, ransomware is a type of malicious software 
that's designed to block access to a computer system 
or its data 
by encrypting it until the ransom is paid to the attacker. 
You can prevent the worst effects of ransomware 
by conducting regular backups, 
installing regular software updates, 
providing security awareness training to your end users, 
and implementing multi-factor authentication 
in your IT systems. 
If you do fall victim of a ransomware attack, 
remember to never pay the ransom, 
disconnect the infected system from the network, 
notify the authorities if that's in alignment 
with your organization's instant response policies, 
and restore your data from known good backups 
to get your business operations restored back to normal 
as quickly as possible. 
 
Video 7:  
In this lesson, 
we're going to explore botnets and zombies. 
Now, a botnet is a network of compromised computers 
or devices controlled remotely by malicious actors 
and they're often used 
for cyber attacks or other malicious activities. 
A botnet is created by using other types of malware 

to gain access to a system, victimize it, 
and then add it to the botnet 
so the attacker who controls the botnet 
can use the processing, memory, storage, 
or networking capabilities of your system 
without your consent. 
Now each botnet is made up of hundreds, thousands, 
or even millions of compromised systems 
which we call zombies. 
Now, a zombie is simply the name 
of a compromised computer or device 
that is part of a botnet 
and used to perform tasks using remote commands 
from the attacker without the user's knowledge. 
So what happens to your computer 
if it becomes the victim of a botnet? 
Well, let's pretend that your computer 
picked up some kind of malware and that malware was designed 
to change your computer into a zombie. 
Your single workstation, 
which is now considered to be a zombie, 
is then added to the larger botnet 
as part of a collection of compromised computers 
under the control of a master node. 
If your computer is now a zombie, 
your system will now be under the control of the attacker 
and that attacker can use a command and control node, 
known as a C2 node, to control all the zombies 
inside of their specific botnet. 
Now, by sending commands to their C2 node, 
the attacker can tell the zombies 
to perform lots of different things, 
including using zombies as pivot points 
so they can get access to a new victim, 
or if they're attacking a server, 
they can actually access it through your computer 
to make it look like you're the one doing the attack 
or the hack instead of the actual attacker 
who sent the command through their master C2 node. 

Other attacks will try to create large botnets 
so they can store illegal content 
across a large number of devices. 
For example, if somebody wants to host child pornography, 
but they're afraid of getting caught with it, 
they can store their illegal videos and photos 
across hundreds or thousands of affected machines 
inside of this botnet. 
Another common use of botnets is use them to spam others 
by sending out phishing campaigns and other malware 
to their targets around the world. 
But, by far, the most common use of a botnet 
is to conduct a DDoS attack 
which is known as a Distributed Denial of Service attack. 
Now, a Distributed Denial of Service attack, 
known as a DDoS, 
will occur anytime you have a lot of machines 
targeting a single victim 
and then attacking them all at the same time. 
Now, let's assume that I'm a threat actor, 
and I have control over 100,000 machines 
as part of my botnet. 
If I wanted to take down your organization's website, 
I can use my C2 node to order all 100,000 zombies 
in my botnet to target your victimized server 
and make requests to it repeatedly 
until the amount of load is so much 
that it forces your web server offline. 
Essentially, your organization can't handle all the load 
that I'm sending to it, 
and so the web server will actually crash 
and not be able to perform its function 
for your legitimate users or customers. 
Since around 2015 though, 
many threat actors have begun to use botnets 
to make money by using their zombies 
to do processor intensive things like crypto mining 
on their behalf too. 
So if an attacker can get 10,000 or a 100,000 zombies 

as part of their botnet, 
they can command those zombies 
to give you 20 to 25% of their available processing power 
so they can continually mine cryptocurrency 
in the background without your knowledge or consent. 
Now, by doing this, they can have a lot of zombies 
working in parallel to mine coins 
that can be stored in the attacker's digital wallet 
by redirecting the gain coins 
through their command and control nodes. 
Another use of botnets by attackers 
is use this combined processing power 
to break through different types of encryption schemes. 
Here again, the attacker is trying to gather 
as many zombies as possible 
to add them to this distributed computational network 
in order to use some of each 
of the zombies' processing capabilities 
to brute force different encryption schemas. 
Now, to avoid detection, 
attackers will usually not take up all 
of your computing power 
but instead they'll usually use 20 or 25% 
of your available processing power, 
so it takes you a little bit longer to detect that, 
and that way you don't realize your machine 
has been compromised. 
After all, if I broke into your machine 
and took over 90 to a 100% of your processing power, 
your computer would fail to respond to your own requests, 
and then you'll start looking for the cause of that, 
which would, in this case, 
find that you are now part of my botnet as a zombie. 
And so most attackers aren't going to be greedy 
and they're not going to try to use up all 90 to 100% 
of your processing power, 
and they'll stick with only 20 to 25% 
across hundreds or thousands of zombies 
to still have a great computational network 

and tons of processing power at their disposal 
for all the malicious or nefarious things they want to do, 
like conducting Distributed Denial of Service attacks 
or making money through crypto mining. 
So remember, botnets and zombies 
are used to create large networks of compromised machines. 
A botnet is a network of compromised computers or devices 
that are controlled remotely by a malicious actor 
and they're often used for cyber attacks 
or other malicious activities. 
A zombie, on the other hand, 
is the name of a single compromised computer or device 
that's part of the botnet 
and it's used to perform the task using remote commands 
from the attacker without the user's knowledge. 
These botnets are used 
to create large distributed computing capabilities 
that can be used by an attacker 
to conduct a Distributed Denial of Service attack, 
for crypto mining, or breaking encryption, 
depending on the needs of that attacker 
and the commands they send 
through their command and control node. 
 
Video 8: rootkits 
 
In this lesson, 
we're going to discuss rootkits. 
Now, a rootkit is a specific type of software 
that's designed to gain administrative-level control, 
over a given computer system without being detected. 
Now, this is a really important concept 
because if somebody can install a rootkit on your system, 
they can gain root 
or administrative-level permissions over that system. 
And this is the highest level of permissions 
that somebody can have on a given computer system or server. 
So, if you're using a Windows machine, for example, 
the account with the highest level of permission, 

is called the administrator account. 
That administrator account allows the person 
to install programs, delete programs, 
open ports, shut ports, 
and do pretty much whatever it is they want to do 
on that given system. 
If the victim is using Unix, Linux or a Mac OS computer, 
this type of administrator account, 
is actually called the root account. 
Either way, getting administrative 
or root account access is a wonderful thing 
for an attacker or threat actor, 
but it is a horrible thing for you 
and the security of your system. 
So now that you have an understanding of what a rootkit is, 
and the type of permissions it's seeking to gain, 
let's take a moment to learn how a rootkit actually works. 
Now, if you look at a computer system, 
it has several different rings of permission used 
throughout the system. 
The outermost ring is called ring three, 
and this is where the user permissions are going to be used. 
So if you're logged as a standard or regular user, 
you're mostly going to be operating in ring three. 
Now, each program can be run in different security rings, 
moving from ring three at the outermost level, 
all the way down to ring zero at the innermost 
or highest permission level in the system. 
When you're operating in ring zero, 
we call this the kernel mode. 
The kernel mode allows the system to control access 
to things like the device drivers, your sound card, 
your video display or monitor, and other things like that. 
Kernel mode or ring zero is not something you're going to log 
into the system as, but instead it is the most trusted 
and powerful ring inside the operating systems design. 
Now, if you log in as the administrator 
or route user on a system, 
you're going to have route permission, 

and you'll be operating at ring one of the operating system. 
Now, this is closer to ring zero than ring three was, 
so it's easier to do more damage on the system 
from ring one than it would be from ring three. 
Now, when a root kit is installed, 
it tries to gain the highest levels of permission possible. 
So any malicious code it's going to execute, 
we'll operate in ring one, or if they're lucky, 
even as low as ring zero. 
Remember, the closer the malicious code is 
to ring zero or the kernel, 
the more permissions it's going to have 
and the more damage it can do on your system. 
Now, when a rootkit is installed on a system, 
it tries to move itself from ring one to ring zero, 
so it can hide from other functions 
of your operating system as well to avoid detection. 
In fact, rootkits are able to perform malicious operations 
on a target computer at any date they want 
without the knowledge of the administrators or the users, 
and even sometimes without the knowledge 
of the operating system itself if they're properly coded. 
Remember, a rootkit is designed to really dig 
into your operating system deeply. 
So your antivirus and anti-malware solutions, 
have a really really hard time detecting them. 
Now, one technique that's used by rootkits 
to gain this deeper level of access is known 
as a DLL injection. 
Now, a DLL injection is a technique used 
to run arbitrary code within the address space 
of another process by forcing it 
to load a dynamic-link library. 
A dynamic-link library, also known as a DLL, 
is simply a collection of code and data 
that can be used by multiple programs simultaneously 
to allow for code reuse and modularization 
in software development. 
And these DLLs are often provided 

by default inside of the Windows operating system. 
With a DLL injection, 
the malicious code is going to be inserted 
into a running process on a Windows machine 
by taking advantage of those dynamic-link libraries 
that are being loaded up at runtime. 
This means that the Windows system, 
doesn't even understand the fact 
that it has a rootkit installed inside of one of those DLLs 
that is then designed 
to load every time you boot up a Windows machine. 
This kind of DLL injection is going to work 
by using what is known as a shim. 
Now, a shim is simply a piece of software code 
that's placed between two components, 
and it intercepts the calls between those two components 
and then it can redirect those calls. 
So the rootkit will intercept the communications, 
between the Windows operating system 
and the dynamic-link library, 
and then it redirects that call once it's embedded 
into some kind of malicious code 
that's being embedded inside of it. 
Now, these rootkits are extremely powerful, 
and they're also very difficult to detect 
because the operating system is essentially blinded to them. 
To detect them, the best way is to boot 
from an external device 
and then scan the internal hard disk drive 
or solid state device 
to ensure you can detect those rootkits, 
using a good anti-malware scanning solution 
from a live boot Linux distribution. 
So remember, a rootkit is a piece of malicious software 
that's designed to infiltr  ate a computer system 
at the highest administrative permission level 
while remaining undetected. 
Rootkits aim to gain access 
as close to ring zero as possible, 

and they'll start out at ring three, 
the user-level permission ring, 
and work their way down all the way to ring zero, 
the kernel mode permission ring, 
where they can wreak the most havoc. 
A rootkit's primary objective is 
to seamlessly embedded itself into the operating system, 
and this is often done 
by exploiting the system's inherent trust 
in the dynamic link library system or DLL system, 
using a DLL injection, and the use of a shim technique. 
Because of the deep rooted nature of a rootkit 
and its ability to hide itself from the operating system, 
traditional antivirus and anti-malware solutions, 
will often fail to detect rootkits. 
Therefore, the most effective method 
for rootkit detection removal is going 
to be to conduct an external system scan. 
Remember, guarding yourself against rootkits, 
does require continuous vigilance 
and the implementation of robust security measures, 
across your entire enterprise systems. 
 
Video 9 : backdoors and logic bombs 
 
In this lesson, we'll cover backdoors and logic bombs. 
Now, a backdoor is originally placed 
into computer programs to bypass the normal security 
and authentication functions of those systems. 
Now, if this sounds like a horrible idea to you, 
you're right, 
because it really is a horrible security practice. 
So why were backdoors created 
in some of our applications and programs? 
Well, it's actually something 
that goes all the way back to the 1980s 
because manufacturers and programmers 
were adding in these back doors 
as a way to get back into their system 

to do maintenance and repairs 
without having to go through all the authentications 
or going through the fir ewalls 
and all the layers of security 
that they normally would if they went through 
the public facing portions of that application. 
Now, back in the 1980s and 1990s 
and even into the early 2000s, 
backdoors were a commonplace thing 
that was put into our applications by programmers. 
But in modern networks, we consider this 
to be a breach of secure coding best practices, 
even though you'll still find some programmers 
who add backdoors into their code. 
So these days, most software will not have a backdoor 
because they've been patched up 
because we know how bad these things are for security 
but there is still some things out there 
that act like back doors. 
Do you know what those might be? 
Well, it's a Remote Access Trojan. 
Now, a Remote Access Trojan can be placed by a threat actor 
onto your computer to help them maintain 
persistent access to your system. 
So if an attacker is able to trick one of your users 
into clicking on a sphere phishing link in an email, 
they may be able to install some kind of malware 
based on clicking that link, and now they have something 
that can create a callback connection to their system. 
This callback to the remote system 
will then allow the attacker to connect to your system 
while bypassing the system's default security posture. 
And this allows a remote access Trojan 
to basically act like a backdoor 
in order to allow the attacker to gain access to your system 
anytime they want. 
Next, we need to talk about something 
known as an Easter Egg. 
Now, Easter Eggs are another insecure coding practice 

that was used by programmers to provide a joke 
or gag gift to their users. 
Essentially, there would be different things 
that would happen in different video games 
or different pieces of software 
when certain pieces of code were executed. 
For example, several years ago, 
Google added an Easter Egg into their search application 
and you can actually still access it today. 
If you want to try it out, 
simply head over to google.com right now 
and type in do a barrel roll into the search bar 
and then press enter. 
Then you'll see the whole webpage do a 360 degree rotation 
as if it was doing a barrel roll inside of an airplane. 
Now, this code has no real function 
except to act as a joke or a gag 
or a hidden secret inside of the search application. 
And that is why this is considered to be an Easter Egg 
because the Google programmers 
decided to put this silly feature into the code 
for the company's most widely used product, 
the Google search bar. 
Now in general, 
you're going to find Easter Eggs are pretty harmless 
but they do add additional code into the applications 
which could create some additional vulnerabilities 
that a threat actor could exploit. 
Now, over the years, I have worked as a penetration tester 
and I have found that Easter Eggs 
generally have more vulnerabilities associated with them 
than the rest of the application. 
And the reason for this is that this type of code 
that creates the Easter Egg is usually meant as a joke 
and it's added right before a product 
is going to be released. 
And this means it doesn't always go through 
the same rigorous forms of security testing 
that the rest of the application did. 

Now, you may be wondering 
why am I talking about Easter Eggs inside of this video? 
Well, it's because Easter Eggs 
are closely linked to logic bombs. 
Now, logic bombs is the next thing we're going to talk about. 
And as I said, they're very similar to Easter Eggs 
and many consider them to be an evolution 
of earlier Easter Eggs 
but they have a more malicious intent. 
Logic bombs are a type of malicious code 
that's inserted into a program and that malicious code 
will only execute when certain conditions have been met. 
For example, a disgruntled employee may insert a logic bomb 
into the server's code so that the program 
will query the company's active directory server 
every single day at midnight. 
If that disgruntled employee's account was terminated 
because they got fir ed, then that malicious code 
will perform some kind of bad action 
like deleting all the files on the server 
or transferring money from the corporate bank account 
over to the employee's personal bank account 
anytime they find that this account was deleted 
by the system when they do their midnight checks. 
Now, one of my favorite examples of a logic bomb 
actually comes from the classic 1993 movie "Jurassic Park." 
In the movie, the parks programmer Dennis Nerdy, 
decides he's going to put a logic bomb into the computer system 
that's operating the power grid 
that is going to keep all the dinosaurs inside 
their electrified enclosures. 
His logic bomb is designed to shut down the power 
for a few minutes so he can run in, 
steal some dinosaur embryos, and then sell them to get rich. 
Now everything begins to go according to his plan. 
At the designated time, 
the power is cut off to the enclosures 
and Dennis is able to sneak out of the room, 
go past all the alarms, 

because there's no power to them anymore, 
and get into the nursery 
to steal some of those dinosaur embryos. 
He thinks he's going to get off 
and sell those embryos and become a millionaire. 
Of course, it all goes bad for him 
and the dinosaurs are running rampant in the park 
because he turned off the electrical grid 
and he ends up getting killed by one of those dinosaurs. 
Now, that's not really the point here, 
but instead I want to provide you with a classic example 
of a logic bomb 'cause he set up some malicious code 
to create an action at a certain time 
and he had this malicious intent when he did it. 
So remember, a backdoor is a covert method 
of bypassing normal authentication or security controls 
in a system that's often introduced 
by the system's original designers or programmers. 
An Easter Egg is going to be a hidden feature 
or novelty within a program that's typically inserted 
by the software developers as an inside joke, 
and a logic bomb is the type of malicious code 
that's inserted into a piece of software 
that will then execute a harmful action 
when specific conditions have been met. 
In our modern applications, 
we should never include back doors, 
Easter Eggs or logic bombs 
because they do go against our secure coding standards 
and best practices. 
So you want to make sure you're scanning 
your customer developed applications 
to ensure that none of these three things 
are included in them if you want to ensure 
that you have the most secure network for your organization. 
 
Video 10: keylogger 
 
In this lesson, 

we're going to explore a malicious type of software 
known as a keylogger. 
Now, in the world of cybersecurity, 
keyloggers hold a special place 
because of their sheer stealth, 
and potential to cause large-scale damage. 
Keyloggers were originally developed 
by system administrators to help them 
troubleshoot technical problems. 
But over the past few decades, 
these tools have become weaponized by cyber criminals 
who want to steal your sensitive information, 
like usernames and passwords, 
directly from the keystrokes of their unsuspecting victims. 
So, what exactly is a keylogger? 
Well, a keylogger, at its core, 
is a piece of software or hardware 
that records every single keystroke that is made 
on a computer or mobile device. 
This means that every letter that is typed in, 
every password that is entered, 
and every web search that's being conducted 
will be captured and sent back to that threat actor 
without your knowledge or consent. 
Keyloggers are considered to be a simple, 
yet effective mechanism that cyber criminals can use 
to get direct access to your personal and financial data. 
This can lead to potential identity theft, financial fraud, 
and even corporate espionage in some cases. 
Now, keyloggers can either be software-based 
or hardware-based. 
When you're dealing with a software-based keylogger, 
these are malicious programs that get installed 
on a victim's computer, 
and they're often bundled with other software 
or delivered through social engineering attacks, 
like phishing and pretexting attacks. 
These keyloggers can also evade antivirus detection, 
especially if the attacker uses 

sophisticated evasion techniques. 
Now, once activated, 
the keylogger can operate silently in the background 
and capture every keystroke, and then transmit it back 
to the remote server that's controlled by a threat actor. 
Now, a hardware keylogger, on the other hand, 
is a physical device 
that needs to be plugged into a computer. 
Usually these will resemble a USB thumb drive, 
or they can be embedded within the keyboard cable itself. 
These are considered physical devices, 
and that means they're harder to deploy on a large scale. 
But they can be very effective for use 
in a more targeted attack, 
especially since these hardware devices are immune 
to software-based detection methods, 
like anti-malware scans. 
When a hardware keylogger is installed on a system, 
the computer actually believes it's a regular keyboard, 
and the system has no idea that it's being victimized 
by the hardware keylogger. 
Now, keyloggers present a lot of risk 
to our systems and our privacy. 
From a personal standpoint, 
victims can have their usernames, passwords, 
credit card numbers, and other sensitive information 
stolen by these keyloggers, 
which can then lead to unauthorized bank transactions, 
unauthorized purchases, or full-scale identity theft. 
Now, from a business or corporate perspective, 
the stakes can be even higher though. 
Employees who have unknowingly been infected with keyloggers 
could give away their logging credentials, 
the contents of their confidential emails, 
the company's proprietary data, 
or even the company's strategic plans 
without even realizing it. 
These security breaches could result in financial losses, 
damage to the organization's reputation, 

legal repercussions, 
and a loss of their competitive advantage 
in the marketplace. 
Now, to protect your organization from keyloggers, 
you should ensure you perform regular updates 
and patches on your systems. 
You should rely on quality antivirus 
and anti-malware solutions. 
You should conduct phishing awareness training 
for all your end-users. 
You should implement multifactor authentication systems. 
You should encrypt keystrokes being sent to your systems, 
and you should perform physical checks of your desktops, 
laptops, or servers to see if a hardware-based keylogger 
is being used. 
First, you should always regularly update 
and patch your systems. 
By keeping your operating systems and software updated, 
Your organization can ensure 
that known vulnerabilities are not being excluded 
by a keylogger. 
Second, you should invest 
in a quality antivirus or anti-malware solution. 
By using comprehensive security software, 
you'll be able to detect and quarantine 
any keylogging software 
that may be installed on your system. 
It's always important to conduct regular antivirus 
and anti-malware scans to detect any keyloggers 
that may have accidentally been installed 
since your last scan. 
Third, you should conduct phishing awareness training 
for your end-users. 
Keyloggers are often distributed through phishing emails, 
so it's really important that you train 
all of your organization's users 
on how to be cautious when they're downloading attachments, 
or clicking links from unknown or untrusted senders. 
Fourth, you should implement multifactor authentication, 

also known as MFA. 
Now, if multifactor authentication has been implemented 
across your enterprise network, 
this means that even if a keylogger was used 
to capture your password, 
the threat actor will still be unable to access the system 
because they require an additional verification step, 
such as an authenticator app code, a one-time text message, 
or your fingerprint or facial scan to recognize you. 
Fifth, you should encrypt keystrokes 
being sent to your systems. 
Some security software can protect your system 
by implementing keystroke encryption 
to scramble your typed information 
before sending it over to the system. 
This means that if the data was captured by a keylogger, 
it's going to be scrambled up in ciphertext, 
and it'll become unusable to a threat actor. 
Sixth, and finally , you should conduct physical checks 
to see if a hardware keylogger is being used. 
This is especially important 
when you're operating in a sensitive environment. 
You should always regularly inspect your system's hardware 
for unfamiliar devices that could contain 
a hardware keylogger too. 
So remember, a key logger is a malicious type of software 
or hardware tool that can covertly record 
the keystrokes being made on a computer or mobile device. 
By understanding the risks 
and adopting comprehensive protection measures, 
both individuals and organizations can significantly reduce 
their vulnerability to these malicious tools 
that attempt to destroy the confidentiality of the data 
that we're typing into our systems. 
 
Video 11: spyware and bloatware 
 
In this lesson, 
we're going to discuss spyware and bloatware. 

In our modern enterprise networks, 
software plays a pivotal role in our daily operations, 
but as software continues to evolve, 
some threat actors and even legitimate organizations 
have taken the opportunity 
to install various types of unwanted 
and potentially harmful software applications 
on our devices. 
First, let's take a look at spyware. 
Spyware, as the name suggests, 
is the type of malicious software that's designed to gather 
and send information about a user 
or organization without their knowledge. 
This information can range from the user's browsing habits 
and software utilization patterns 
to more sensitive data, like passwords, credit card numbers 
and other relevant personal details too. 
Spyware can get installed on a system 
in several different ways, 
including being bundled with other software, 
being installed through a malicious website 
or be installed when a user clicks 
on a deceptive pop-up advertisement. 
Once installed, 
the spyware will typically operate in the background 
without the user's knowledge or consent. 
Spyware can cause issues because it invades your privacy, 
but it can also have other negative effects, 
such as significantly slowing down 
your system's performance. 
It is continually using your system's resources 
to monitor and transmit data back to the attacker 
who's gathering information about you. 
To help protect yourself against spyware, 
you should only use reputable antivirus 
and anti spyware tools that are regularly updated 
to be able to detect and remove any potential threats. 
Also, whenever you're downloading software, 
you should only download it from trusted sources 

and you should read through 
the end user licensing agreement, known as the EULA, 
to see if the company is collecting any of your personal 
or private data without your knowledge. 
Finally, you should make sure that your operating system 
and other software applications are up to date 
and patched with the latest security updates 
to ensure that spyware cannot exploit 
any known vulnerabilities that exist in your system. 
Second, we have bloatware. 
Now, bloatware is quite different from spyware, 
but it can be just as frustrating 
when it gets installed on your system. 
Now, bloatware refers to any software 
that comes pre-installed on your new computer or smartphone 
that you, as the user, did not specifically request, 
want or need. 
Bloatware isn't really dangerous, 
but it does take up precious resources on your devices, 
including storage space 
and using up your limited system RAM, 
or Random Access Memory. 
Typically, you're going to find that manufacturers 
or vendors of a device will add this kind of bloatware 
as part of their promotional partnership deals. 
For example, if you bought a new Windows laptop 
and it came with a 30 day free trial of Microsoft Office 365 
and 90 day free trial of Norton Antivirus, 
these are both considered to be bloatware 
because you didn't ask for them to be installed, 
and instead, 
these companies paid the manufacturer your laptop 
to pre-install these applications on that laptop, 
so that you will hopefully purchase their paid version 
of these applications. 
And so this becomes a marketing technique 
for these companies. 
Other examples of bloatware 
are things like unnecessary toolbars 

or applications that can promote certain services 
that may exist inside of your computer. 
Now, in general, bloatware is not going to be malicious, 
but as I said, it does waste your storage space, 
slows down the performance of your devices 
and introduces new security vulnerabilities 
into your systems, 
because all that extra code could have bugs in it, 
and those bugs could be exploited by an attacker. 
Remember, anytime you have a piece of software installed, 
that is going to be one more potential threat vector 
for the attacker to exploit 
if you don't properly update that application. 
Personally, I find the best practice 
is to remove any extra software or applications 
that you're not using on a daily basis 
to help minimize the attack surface 
of your devices and systems. 
Now, to remove bloatware, you can either manually remove it, 
or you can use bloatware removal tools, 
or you can perform a clean operating system installation. 
First, we have a manual removal process. 
For Windows-based devices, 
you can go to the programs 
and feature section in the Control Panel 
and uninstall any unwanted software you have. 
If you're using a smartphone or tablet, 
you can navigate to the app section in the settings 
and uninstall or disable any unnecessary applications 
from your device. 
Second, we can use bloatware removal tools 
to uninstall the unwanted applications. 
There are several third party tools 
available in the marketplace that can help identify 
and remove bloatware more comprehensively 
than you might be able to do on your own, 
so they are something to think about or to consider. 
Third, and my personal preference, 
is to perform a clean operating system installation 

whenever you buy a new device. 
Instead of using the operating system 
and the bloatware that came pre-installed on your device, 
you can instead perform 
what is known as a clean operating system installation, 
which ensures you are only going to be starting out 
with a software you need on your new system. 
So remember, spyware and bloatware represents software 
that isn't necessarily always malicious, 
but it is considered to be unwanted. 
Spyware is the type of malicious software designed to gather 
and send information about a user 
or organization without their knowledge or consent. 
Bloatware, on the other hand, 
refers to software that comes pre-installed on a new device, 
computer, or smartphone, which the user did not request 
and often doesn't need or doesn't want. 
While spyware and bloatware do serve different purposes 
and provide different threat levels against our systems, 
it is important to be aware of the existence of both spyware 
and bloatware in order to understand how to manage 
or eliminate these risks to create a safer, 
more efficient and more pleasant experience 
for our end users when using our systems and devices. 
 
Video 12: malware attack techniques 
 
In this lesson, 
we're going to explore malware exploitation techniques. 
Now, a malware exploitation technique is a specific method 
by which malware code penetrates 
and infects a targeted system. 
Historically, malware would modify an executable file 
or assert a malicious macro into a document file 
on a target storage device to ensure 
that every time the file was open or run, 
that malware would be activated 
and ready to execute its malicious payload. 
Other types of malware, like worms, are instead 

going to focus on infecting the system's memory 
to leverage a remote procedure call 
over the organization's network to spread its malicious code 
across the entire enterprise. 
However, in modern enterprise networks, 
we're now seeing an evolution by malware that's created 
to utilize fileless malware technique instead. 
This modern type of malware will also bypass detection 
from signature-based security systems 
like antivirus and anti-malware solutions 
by directly executing the malicious code as a script 
or as a small piece of shell code. 
This fileless execution is going to be used to create a process 
in the system memory without relying 
on the local file system of that infected host. 
And this kind of fileless malware will also become harder 
to detect because it leaves behind very few traces 
or indicators of compromise 
in comparison to standard pieces of file-based malware. 
Now, some of these fileless malwares 
might temporarily write some data 
to a directory on your system, 
but they are designed to erase those artifacts 
after it finishes executing. 
So even these types are considered to be largely fileless 
due to the limited amount 
of evidence being left behind on the file system. 
So how does this modern type of malware work? 
Well, in general, most modern malware will use 
a basic two-stage deployment model. 
When a user accidentally clicks on a malicious link 
or opens a malicious file, 
the specific type of malware being installed is known 
as a stage one dropper or a downloader. 
This piece of malware is usually going to be created 
as a lightweight shell code that can be executed 
on a given system. 
Now, you may have noticed, I just used three new terms 
that you may not be familiar with, 

so let me define those real quick. 
These are droppers, downloaders, and shell codes. 
Now, a dropper is a specific malware type designed 
to initiate or run other malware forms 
within a payload on an infected host. 
Downloaders, on the other hand, retrieve additional tools 
post the initial infection that's facilitated by a dropper. 
Meanwhile, the shell code is a broader term 
that encompasses lightweight code meant 
to execute an exploit on a given target. 
Now, the primary function of a stage one dropper 
or downloader is to retrieve additional portions 
of the malware code and trick the user into activating it. 
Once the stage one dropper or downloader is activated, 
it's going to then try to install a second stage downloader 
that will download and install a remote access Trojan 
to give the threat actor the ability to conduct command 
and control over the victimized system. 
Once this access is established 
using a stage two downloader, 
the threat actor can then focus 
on consolidating their position on the system 
by using remote access tools to identify 
and infect other systems across the network. 
As the attacker spreads their influence 
across the enterprise, 
they're looking to compromise high value targets 
like servers or domain controllers 
to give them an even stronger foothold into your network. 
But even if these premium targets remain elusive 
to the threat actor, they're still going to try to compromise 
as many additional workstations as possible 
to continually expand their permissions 
and footprint across your network. 
Now, once they've established a stronghold, 
the threat actor will then transition 
into the action on objectives phase of their attack. 
During this phase, 
the threat actor will execute their primary objectives 

whether that's data exfiltr  ation, 
file encryption as part of a ransomware attack, 
or any other malicious activities 
that might help them meet their core objectives. 
Now, once stage one and stage two malware has been installed 
and utilized, the final step 
of their attack is to conduct concealment. 
Concealment is going to be used to help threat actors prolong 
their unauthorized access on your systems 
by hiding their tracks, erasing log files 
and hiding any evidence of their malicious activities 
up to this point. 
Now malware can be delivered 
to a system using many different techniques 
including code injection, masquerading, DLL injection 
DLL sideloading and process hollowing 
to deploy the threat actor's malicious code 
into your system. 
For example, 
code injection is used to disguise the malicious code 
by running it with the identification 
of a legitimate process. 
These various malware deployment methods can also 
be combined with anti-forensic strategies like encryption, 
compression and obfuscation to make it more challenging 
for cyber defense professionals to detect 
and analyze these malicious threats. 
Now, in some of the more modern incident responses 
that I've worked on, we've also seen a rise 
in a sophisticated strategy known as living off the land, 
and this has been adopted 
by numerous advanced persistent threats 
and criminal organizations in their attacks. 
In living off the land, the threat actors are actually 
going to try to exploit the standard system tools 
to conduct their malicious activities and intrusions. 
For example, PowerShell is a standard tool that's installed 
by default on many Windows systems and servers. 
PowerShell can be manipulated to conduct lots 

of different types of malicious activities, though. 
Since these tools are installed by default 
in the operating system, it means that it's really easy 
for an attacker to obscure their malicious activities 
by making the detection of those activities more difficult 
by relying on internal PowerShell commands 
as opposed to downloading additional malicious code. 
As a cybersecurity professional, it is really important 
that you're aware of these types of techniques 
to ensure your system is well protected against them. 
 
Video 13: indications of malware attacks: 
 
In this lesson, we're going to look at 
some of the indications of malware attacks. 
Now, your understanding of the various indicators 
of malware attacks is going to be essential 
as you progress in your career 
as a cybersecurity professional. 
By recognizing the signs of a malware attack early on, 
you can better mitigate the damage 
that these attacks may cause to your systems. 
Now, there are nine common indicators 
of malware attacks that you should be aware of, 
including account lockouts, 
concurrent session utilization, blocked content, 
impossible travel, resource consumption, 
resource inaccessibility, out-of-cycle logging, 
missing logs, and published or documented attacks. 
Let's take a quick look at each 
of these different types of indications. 
First, we have account lockouts. 
Now, malware, especially those designed 
for credential theft or brute force attacks, 
will trigger multiple failed login attempts 
that could result in a user's account being locked out. 
These lockouts aren't merely an inconvenience though, 
they're a bright red flag that somebody 
is trying to break into your network. 

If you suddenly see a lot of your users 
cannot access their accounts anymore 
despite not entering an incorrect password, 
or if there's an unusual surge in locked accounts 
across your enterprise network, 
this could be a good indication 
of a malware attack that's underway. 
Second, we have concurrent session utilization. 
Now, our users should typically only have 
one active session at any given time inside of our network. 
If you notice that a single user account 
has multiple simultaneous or concurrent sessions open, 
especially from various geographic locations, 
this should really be a cause for concern and suspicion. 
Seeing concurrent session utilization 
may be a good indication that some kind of malware 
has hijacked the user's account 
is now using it for their own malicious activities. 
Third, we have blocked content. 
Modern cybersecurity tools are usually going to be equipped 
with the ability to block known malicious content 
such as certain types of files or links. 
If there's a sudden increase in 
the amount of blocked content alerts 
you're seeing from your security tools, 
this is a strong indication that a malware infection 
may have successfully penetrated your system. 
Fourth, we have impossible travel. 
Now, impossible travel refers to a scenario 
where a user's account is accessed from two 
or more geographically separated locations 
in an impossibly short period of time. 
For example, I just logged into my system 
from Orlando, Florida about 10 minutes ago. 
Now, if you see right now, that I'm trying 
to log in from New York City, 
this would be considered impossible travel 
because it takes more than 10 minutes 
to fly from Orlando to New York. 

It takes about three hours. 
Usually, if we see impossible travel, 
this is an indication that a user's account 
has been compromised, and it's often due 
to some kind of malicious activity, 
or as an aftermath of a successful malware attack 
that was able to harvest your user's credentials 
like their username and password. 
Fifth, we have resource consumption. 
Now, many forms of malware, especially Cryptominers, 
botnets, and worms, can consume a significant amount 
of system resources once you've been infected by them. 
If you're observing any unusual spikes in CPU, memory, 
or network bandwidth utilization 
that can't be linked back to a legitimate task, 
that could be an indication 
that you're the victim of a malware attack. 
High resource consumption can also lead to system slowdowns 
that make it very noticeable and impactful 
that you have a malware injection occurring. 
Sixth, we have resource inaccessibility. 
Now, ransomware is a form of malware 
that encrypts user files 
to make them inaccessible to the user. 
If you have a large number of files or critical systems 
that are suddenly inaccessible to you, 
Or if users receive messages demanding payment 
to decrypt their data, this is a pretty clear sign 
of a ransomware based malware attack. 
Seventh, we have out-of-cycle logging. 
Now, logs are crucial for understanding 
our systems and their various activities. 
If you're noticing that your logs 
are being generated at odd hours, 
or during times when no legitimate activities 
should have been taking place, 
such as in the middle of the night 
when no employees are actively working, 
this could be an indication 

that you're the victim of a malware attack. 
This kind of out-of-cycle logging could reveal 
that unauthorized data transfers or system modifications 
are being conducted by an attacker. 
So it's important to review your logs regularly 
to detect these types of infections. 
Eighth, we have missing logs. 
Now, missing logs can be a very alarming sign for us 
as cybersecurity professionals. 
Often, we're going to see that a threat actor 
or attacker will delete your system logs 
in order to hide their own tracks 
after successfully breaching your system. 
So, if you're conducting a log review 
as a cybersecurity analyst, and you see 
there's a large gap in your logs, 
or if the logs have been cleared out completely 
without any authorized reason, 
this could be a good indication 
that you are the victim of some kind of 
malicious activity or malware attack. 
And this means somebody is trying to cover their tracks. 
Ninth and finally , we have published and documented attacks. 
Now, this one is pretty obvious, 
but if a cybersecurity researcher or reporter 
publishes a report that shows that 
your organization's network has been infected 
as part of a botnet or other malware based attack, 
this will serve as your notice that you've been attacked. 
Now, hopefully your organization has 
well-trained cybersecurity professionals 
who will know that you've been 
the victim of a malware infection 
before you read about it on the cover of the New York Times. 
But if you don't, this is the final way 
that you will know that you are the victim 
of a malware attack because it's sitting there 
right on the front page of the newspaper. 
So remember, you must first recognize 

the indications of malware attacks 
if you have any hope of responding against them. 
While some indications are pretty overt 
and in your face like a ransom demand from ransomware, 
or an article being published 
on the front page of the New York Times, 
others can be much more subtle, 
and require a more in-depth and careful observation. 
Like unusual resource consumption 
or unexpected account lockouts. 
By regularly monitoring your system's health, 
user activities, and logs, you're going to be 
in a much stronger position to promptly detect 
and respond to any malware threats 
that may occur against your systems. 
 
--- END unit-6 ---


--- START unit-7 ---


Unit 7 data protection 
 
Video 1 Data Protection (OBJ 1.4, 3.3, 4.2, 4.4, & 5.1) 
 
In this section of the course 
we're going to go over data protection. 
Now, data protection is a critical aspect 
of information security, 
and it's the process of safeguarding 
important information from corruption, 
compromise, or loss. 
Data protection really does include a broad range 
of practices, technologies, strategies, and concepts 
that are designed to ensure the confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of your data. 
Now, as the world becomes increasingly digital, 
the importance of data protection has skyrocketed 
and has become a central concern 
for individuals, businesses, and governments alike. 
In this section of the course, 
we're going to be diving into the details 
of data protection to explore its significance, 
the challenges it presents, 
and the strategies employed to maintain the security 
of our most valuable digital assets. 
So as we go through this section of the course, 
we're going to be going over a lot of different objectives, 
including ones from Domain 1, Domain 3, 
Domain 4, and Domain 5, 
which includes objective 1.4, 3.3, 4.2, 4.4, and 5.1. 
Now, objective 1.4 states that you must be able to explain 
the importance of using 
appropriate cryptographic solutions. 
Objective 3.3 states that you must be able to compare 
and contrast concepts and strategies to protect data. 
Objective 4.2 states that you must be able to explain 
the security implications of proper hardware, 
software, and data asset management. 
Objective, 4.4 states that you must be able to explain 

security alerting and monitoring concepts and tools. 
And objective 5.1 states that you must be able to summarize 
elements of effective security governance. 
So, as we move through this section 
we'll start off by going over 
the different data classifications 
that you need to know about, 
including sensitive data, confidential data, public data, 
restricted data, private data, and critical data. 
After that, we'll discuss data ownership 
and the different roles that exist to make sure 
data is well protected and maintained 
throughout its lifetime. 
And some of these roles are things like the data owner, 
the data controller, the data processor, 
the data custodian, and the data steward. 
Then we'll talk about data states. 
And these data states include data at rest, 
data in transit, data in use, and how we can protect data 
in each of those states using methods like disc encryption 
and communication tunneling. 
Next up, we'll discuss some different data types, 
including regulated data, trade secrets, 
intellectual property, legal information, 
financial information, and human 
and non-human readable data. 
Then we're going to be going over data sovereignty, 
and data sovereignty refers to a concept 
where information is subject to the laws 
and governance structures within the nation 
where it's collected. 
This means that data collected in a particular country 
must follow the laws of that country, 
including how it's managed, stored, and processed. 
After that, we're going to discuss securing data 
and the different methods that can be used 
to make sure your data is protected 
including geographic restrictions, 
encryption, hashing, masking, 

tokenization, ossification, segmentation 
and permission restriction. 
Next step, we'll be covering data loss prevention. 
Now, data loss prevention or DLP 
is a strategy for ensuring 
the sensitive or critical information 
doesn't leave your organization 
either intentionally or unintentionally. 
This is achieved through various tools and processes 
that are designed to detect 
potential data breaches or exfiltr  ation techniques. 
Finally, we'll take a short quiz 
to see what you learned during this section of the course 
and review each of those quiz questions fully 
to ensure you can explain why each answer was right. 
So, if you're ready, 
let's hop on in to data protection 
in this section of the course. 
 
 
Video 2 Data Classifications (OBJ 3.3) 
 
In this lesson, we are going to talk 
a bit more in depth about the concept 
of data classifications. 
We are going to formally define them 
to ensure that you're ready for any questions you get 
about data classifications on the exam. 
Data classification is based on the value 
to the organization and the sensitivity of the information 
if it's going to be disclosed. 
The person that decides that level 
of data classification is the data owner. 
Now, what exactly would we consider 
sensitive data or information? 
Well, sensitive data is any information that can result 
in the loss of security or loss of advantage to a company, 
especially if it's accessed by unauthorized persons. 
Now, basically, 

this is the data that we need to be protecting. 
Anything that is sensitive, 
we want to make sure that there's protection around it, 
but we can protect everything equally, 
and that's why we have to classify data 
into several different categories, 
and those that are higher classification are going to need 
more protections and more resources spent against them. 
Those that are in lower categories, 
we're going to spend less on in terms of protection, 
time, and resources. 
Now, organizations need to be careful to establish 
proper policies to identify how data should be classified, 
because one of the trends I've seen a lot 
of people do is overclassifying data. 
If you are overclassifying your data, 
this is going to lead you 
to having to protect everything at a really high level, 
which means you are going to spend a lot more money, 
a lot more time, and a lot more resources 
to protect the data. 
This includes additional personnel, 
additional access controls, and other technical solutions 
that you are going to have to buy and deploy. 
So by classifying the data properly, 
it can then be separated into different levels of protection 
based on those classifications. 
There are two different classification schemes 
that are normally used by organizations, 
and the way you choose yours is based 
on whether you're a commercial business 
or a governmental organization. 
So if you're a commercial business like we are, 
you're going to use one 
of four common classification levels, 
and these go from lowest to highest 
as public, sensitive, private, and confidential. 
Public data would have no impact 
on your company if it's released, 

and usually this is information that is posted 
on an open source environment 
such as your website or other platforms. 
For example, this course is public data 
that is part of our organizational data. 
We've released it to the public. 
Anyone who pays for it can get access to the material. 
Then we have sensitive data. 
Sensitive data might have a minimal impact if released, 
such as your organization's financial data, or in my case, 
maybe the next course that I'm working on. 
I wouldn't want to get it out there 
before I release the course, 
because I don't want my competitors to see it 
and copy my material. 
Next, we have private data. 
Private data would contain things 
like personal records, salary information, 
any other data that is used only within the organization. 
For example, you don't need to know what the revenue is 
for our company, or how much our employees make, 
or what their social security numbers are. 
All of that is private data that we use internally, 
but none of our customers or anybody 
outside the organization needs to have access to it. 
Remember, private data is information 
that relates to an individual entity. 
Next, we have confidential data. 
This is going to contain items such as trade secrets, 
intellectual property or IP, source code, 
and other types of things that are seriously going to affect 
the business if disclosed. 
It can only be viewed by approved personnel, 
and possibly third parties under an NDA. 
So if you think about CompTIA, 
one of the things that's confidential is the test questions. 
They don't want all of those test questions running 
around the internet where you can download them, 
find the answers, and then go in 

and take the exams just by memorizing the test, right? 
That is against their policies, 
therefore, they protect the data as confidential data. 
Finally, we have critical data. 
This information is too valuable 
to allow any risk if it's captured. 
Viewing is severely restricted. 
This can be credit card numbers, for example, 
where access is severely limited 
to a few trusted individuals. 
Now, if you work in a military or government sector, 
you're going to have fiv e different classification levels 
going from lowest to highest. 
These are probably what you hear inside movies all the time, 
things like unclassified, sensitive but classified, 
confidential, secret, top secret. 
The lowest classification is unclassified, 
and unclassified data generally can be released 
to the public, either just in general, 
or under the Freedom of Information Act. 
So there's actually a law in the United States 
that the public has a right to know information 
about their government, and if you submit 
a Freedom of Information Act request to one 
of the government organizations, they have to find 
all of the unclassified data that matches those terms 
that you've asked for, and then provide it back to you. 
The next category is called sensitive 
but unclassified data, and this includes things 
like medical records, personal files, 
and other items that won't hurt national security 
if released, but would impact those 
whose data is being used inside of it. 
So for example, if you look at the military, 
they have a lot of soldiers, sailors, and airmen. 
If I took one of their medical records 
that has their birthday, their social security number, 
and medical information about them, 
that would be considered sensitive but unclassified. 

If it gets out that private Timmy had a strep infection 
last week, that would affect Timmy maybe, 
but it's not going to affect the military at large. 
The next one we have is confidential. 
Confidential data includes data such as trade secrets, 
other information that can seriously affect the government 
if unauthorized disclosure were to happen 
Then we get into secret data, 
and secret data is going to include things 
like military deployment plans, defensive postures, 
and other information that could seriously damage 
national security if disclosure was to happen. 
Now, when I talked about confidential data, 
it would seriously affect us. 
Now, if I talk about secret data, 
it could seriously damage us. 
Finally, we have the highest classification, 
which is known as top secret. 
Top secret data might include the blueprints 
for a weapon system or other information 
that would gravely damage national security 
if it was known to those who were not authorized 
for this level of information. 
So you can see 
that these classifications get more and more serious, 
and they would have bigger and bigger effects to us, 
and so we're willing to spend more money and more time 
to protect the higher levels of classification. 
Protecting data takes up a lot of resources, 
as I've already mentioned, and therefore, 
it's really important for you to understand the lifecycle 
of the data as you collect it, retain it, 
and eventually dispose of it. 
Now, what I mean by that is that 
data should not be stored forever. 
Your organization needs to have policies 
that are going to dictate how the data is being stored, 
when the data is going to be stored, 
and for how long it is going to be stored, and then finally , 

how are you going to destroy it when you are done with it. 
For example, let's say I was going to have a course 
that's going to happen next week, and you sign up 
to attend the course, and you give me your information 
like your credit card number, your name, 
your address, your email, things like that. 
How should I keep that in my system? 
Should I keep it just until you come and show up 
for the course, or should I keep it for the next six months, 
maybe a year, maybe fiv e years, 
maybe 20 years, maybe forever? 
Well, that's going to depend on the organizational needs. 
All of this should be defined in your policies, 
and they should clearly be documenting 
what your organizational needs are, 
how long you need to keep this data, 
and what the lifecycle is going to look like. 
Also, you need to ensure that you're following 
the local, state, and government laws 
and regulations for data retention time requirements, 
because depending on the type of organization you are, 
you may have legal requirements that may say 
that you need to contain certain types of data 
for certain periods of time. 
 
 
Video 3 Data Ownership (OBJ 4.2 & 5.1) 
 
In this lesson, 
we are going to talk about data ownership 
and some of the things that are important inside of it. 
Now, when we talk about data ownership, 
this is the process of identifying the person responsible 
for the confidentiality, integrity, availability, 
and privacy of the information assets. 
Now, you might think that the data owner 
is the person who created the file 
but that's not what we're talking about. 
In an enterprise environment, 

there are different roles that fall 
under this idea of data ownership. 
These include things like the data owner themselves, 
the data controller, the data processor, the data custodian, 
the data steward, and the data privacy officer  . 
Let's take a look at each of these. 
First, we have our data owner. 
This is going to be a senior executive role 
and they have the ultimate responsibility 
for maintaining the confidentiality, integrity, 
and availability of the information asset. 
So, what is the real role here as the data owner? 
It's not the person who created the file, 
it's the senior executive. 
And this data owner is going to be responsible 
for labeling the asset, 
ensuring that it's protected with the appropriate controls. 
So the data owner is going to say this type of information 
when we're dealing with it. 
Let's say, the balance sheets for the corporation, 
they should be protected as financial information. 
So, anybody who creates it will now follow my rules 
and label as financial information 
and we're going to protect financial information 
by doing X, Y, and Z, whatever those controls are. 
Next, the data controller. 
The entity that holds the responsibility 
for deciding the purposes 
and methods of data storage, collection, and usage, 
and for guaranteeing the legality 
of these processes is known as the data controller. 
The data controller holds the ultimate accountability 
for any breaches of privacy, 
cannot delegate this responsibility to another party. 
Next, the data processor. 
The data processor is a group or individual hired 
by the data controller to help with tasks like collecting, 
storing, or analyzing the data. 
They work under the direction of the data controller 

and follow their instructions for data collecting 
or processing. 
Now, the data steward 
is a role that's focused on the quality 
of the data and the associated metadata. 
The data steward is going to be somebody 
who is working for the data owner. 
They're going to be involved with making sure 
that the data is appropriately labeled and classified. 
So, we said that all financial data 
should be labeled as financial data, 
and it should be taken care of this way. 
That's going to be the role of the data steward 
to make sure that actually happens. 
Now, as we go down further, we get to our data custodian. 
That is the role that is responsible 
for handling the management of the system 
which data assets are stored. 
So, who might be a data custodian? 
Well, a system administrator. 
These are the people responsible 
for enforcing the access control, the encryption, 
and the backup recovery measures that protect this data 
based on the requirements set forth by the data owner. 
And so, you can see how all of this goes upward as you go. 
Then we have our privacy officer  . 
Now, this is a role that is responsible 
for the oversight of any kind of privacy related data. 
Things like PII, SPI, or PHI, 
any of those things that are managed by the company 
fall under the realm of the privacy officer  . 
This is the person who's going to really be on the hook 
if you have a data breach, 
because normally, when you have a data breach, 
what people are concerned about 
is the privacy of user data that has been expelled, 
and so, that is going to be what they're focused on. 
They have to make sure that we are complying 
with legal and regulatory frameworks 

and make sure that we have the right purpose, 
limitations, and consent. 
We're doing data minimization, 
data sovereignty, data retention, 
all the stuff we've been talking about in this section 
falls under the privacy officer  . 
Now, the real question is who should own the data? 
Now, in a lot of organizations, 
they try to make the CIO or the IT department 
in charge of all the information and be the data owners, 
but that is the wrong answer because, 
as the IT personnel, we don't know much about the data, 
we know about the systems. 
We should be the data custodians. 
Instead, the data owners should be somebody 
from the business side. 
People who are creating this information. 
Each data owner can actually be specified 
inside their own department. 
So, for instance, you might have the accountant department 
have their leader be the data owner, 
and they would have a data owner over their information, 
because if I, as the IT person, 
am looking at some accounting data, 
I don't know it well enough to be able to classify it 
at the right level. 
So, this is one of those things 
that I think is really important 
is that IT people should not be the data owners, 
and the data owners should really be the people 
who know more about the data 
based on the context of the company. 
So, if your company is a software development company, 
then the software design department 
should probably be the data owner. 
If you're an accountant firm, 
it should be the financial department or the CFO, 
somebody who knows about the data 
who can make the right decisions 

as far as labeling and classification. 
That is who your data owner should be. 
 
 
Video 4 Data States (OBJ 3.3) 
 
Data states. 
Understanding the different states of data is crucial. 
Each state represents a different phase 
of the data lifecycle, 
and requires specific security measures 
to protect against potential threats. 
In this lesson, 
we are going to discuss the three data states. 
Data at rest, data in transit, and data in use, 
and the ways you can protect your data 
in each of those states. 
First, data at rest. 
Data at rest refers to any data stored in databases, 
file systems, or other storage systems. 
This data is not actively moving 
through the network or processes. 
It's like the information stored on a computer's hard drive 
or a company servers. 
Given its static nature, 
data at rest is a prime target for threat actors. 
Therefore, it's essential to employ robust security measures 
such as encryption. 
Encryption converts readable data into coded data, 
and ensures that even if unauthorized users access the data, 
they cannot understand it without the decryption key. 
There are several types of encryption methods 
used for data at rest. 
These are full disk encryption, partition encryption, 
file encryption, volume encryption, database encryption, 
and record encryption. 
Full disk encryption. 
This method encrypts the entire hard drive. 
When the system is off, the data is encrypted. 

When the system is on, and the user is logged in, 
the data is then decrypted. 
This can be achieved through the OS, third party software, 
or the disc device itself. 
Next, partition encryption. 
This method only encrypts specific partitions 
of a hard drive, leaving other partitions un-encrypted. 
For example, you can encrypt the D drive on your workstation 
because it includes sensitive work information 
that you do not want other people 
using your workstation to access. 
Next, file encryption. 
This method encrypts individual files. 
It's often used when specific files need to be secured. 
For example, encrypting a file on your workstation 
that includes the secret codes to your GTA cheats. 
Then volume encryption. 
This method encrypts a set of selected files or directories. 
Like the previous examples, 
you can select and encrypt multiple files and directories 
when opting for volume or folder level encryption. 
Next up, database encryption. 
This method encrypts data stored in the database. 
It can be done at the column, row, or table level. 
Finally, record encryption. 
This method encrypts specific fields 
within a database record. 
This could be beneficial when multiple users 
are accessing the same database, 
but not all of them have the same access and view rights, 
and so some records would be encrypted from those users. 
Next up, data in transit. 
Data in transit, also known as data in motion, 
refers to data actively being moved 
from one location to another, 
such as across the Internet or through a private network. 
This data is vulnerable to interception during its journey. 
To secure data in transit, 
transport or communication encryption methods are used. 

These include SSL and TLS, VPNs and IPSec. 
SSL or the Secure Socket Layer, 
and TLS or the Transport Layer Security 
are cryptographic protocols designed 
to provide secure communication over computer network. 
They are widely used in web browsing, 
email, and other data transfers. 
VPNs or virtual private networks are technologies 
that create secure connections over a less secure network, 
such as the Internet. 
It ensures that data sent and received 
is encrypted and secured from prying eyes. 
Finally, IPSec or the Internet Protocol Security. 
This protocol suite is used 
to secure the internet protocol communications 
by authenticating and encrypting each IP packet 
in a data stream. 
Finally, data in use. 
Data in use refers to the data 
in the process of being created, retrieved, 
updated, or deleted. 
In other words, it's data that's actively being processed. 
While this state is often overlooked, 
it's just as vulnerable to threats as the other states. 
Securing data in use is challenging 
because the data must be decrypted to be processed. 
Techniques such as encryption at the application level, 
access controls, and secure enclaves, 
where data can be processed 
in a protected isolated environment are commonly used. 
Also, some mechanisms like the Intel software guard 
are able to encrypt data as it exists in memory 
so that an untrusted process cannot decode the information. 
So remember, there are three data states out there. 
Data at rest, data in transit, and data in use. 
Data at rest can be protected by using encryption 
and implementing ACLs. 
Data in use can be protected 
through the use of access controls. 

Data in transit can be protected 
through the use of communication tunneling protocols 
and data in use can be protected 
by using encryption at the application level. 
Understanding the different states of data 
and the appropriate security measures for each 
is fundamental to comprehensive data protection. 
By implementing robust security measures at each state, 
organizations can significantly reduce 
the risk of data breaches and ensure the integrity 
and confidentiality of their data. 
 
 
Video 5 Data Types (OBJ 3.3 & 1.4) 
 
Data types. 
In the digital age, data is the lifeblood of organizations. 
It drives decision making, fuels innovation, 
and provides insights into business operations. 
However, not all data is created equal. 
Different types of data 
require varying levels of protection 
and are subject to different regulations. 
In this lesson, we're going to explore several data types, 
including regulated data such as PII and PHI, 
trade secrets, intellectual property, 
legal information, financial information, 
and human-readable versus non-human readable data. 
First, regulated data. 
Regulated data is information that is controlled by laws, 
regulations, or industry standards. 
This includes data 
such as personal identification information, 
health records, and credit card information. 
Organizations that handle regulated data 
must comply with specific security and privacy requirements 
such as the General Data Protection Regulation 
in the European Union, 
or the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act, 

HIPAA in the United States. 
Now, PII refers to any information 
that can be used to identify an individual. 
Examples include names, 
social security numbers, and addresses. 
PII is often targeted by cyber criminals 
and its protection is mandated by several privacy laws. 
PHI on the other hand is any information 
about health status, provision of healthcare, 
or payment for healthcare 
that can be linked to a specific individual. 
This includes any part of a patient's medical record 
or payment history. 
PHI is protected under the Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act or HIPAA in the United States. 
Next up, trade secrets. 
Trade secrets are a type 
of confidential business information 
that provides a company with a competitive edge. 
This can include manufacturing processes, 
marketing strategies, proprietary software, 
and customer lists. 
Trade secrets are protected by law, 
and unauthorized disclosure 
can result in severe legal penalties. 
For example, here at Dion Training, 
we have a specific way that we make our courses. 
It is the reason why our courses are so popular 
and so many students around the world swear by them. 
That is considered our trade secret. 
Next up, intellectual property. 
Intellectual property or IP 
refers to the creations of the mind, 
such as inventions, literary and artistic works, 
designs, and symbols. 
This data is protected by laws like patents, 
copyrights, and trademarks 
to encourage innovation and creativity. 
Unauthorized use of intellectual property 

can lead to legal action. 
Going back to the Dion Trading example, 
any of our courses here is considered IP. 
You cannot just download the videos 
and post them on your website as your own. 
Next up, legal information includes any data 
related to legal proceedings, contracts, 
or regulatory compliance. 
This data type is sensitive 
and requires high levels of protection 
to maintain client confidentiality 
and comply with legal professional privilege. 
Next on the list is financial information. 
Financial information includes data 
related to organization's financial transactions, 
such as sales records, invoices, 
tax documents, and bank statements. 
This data is often targeted by cyber criminals 
for fraud or identity theft purposes. 
Therefore, it is crucial to protect financial information 
with robust security measures. 
Financial information is usually subject to regulations 
like the PCI DSS 
which is the Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard. 
Finally, human and non-human readable data. 
Human-readable data is the information 
that can be understood directly by humans 
without the need for a machine or software. 
Examples include text documents and spreadsheets. 
On the other hand, non-human readable data 
is information that requires a machine 
or a software to interpret. 
This includes binary code or machine language. 
While non-human readable data 
can be more challenging to interpret and manipulate, 
it still needs to be protected 
as it can contain sensitive information. 
In conclusion, understanding the different types of data 
and their associated security requirements 

is crucial for any organization. 
By classifying data correctly 
and applying appropriate security measures, 
organizations can protect their valuable data assets, 
comply with regulations, and maintain the reputation 
and trust with customers and partners. 
 
 
Video 6 Data Sovereignty (OBJ 3.3) 
 
Data sovereignty. 
In today's cloud-dominant world, 
data sovereignty has emerged 
as a critical aspect of data governance. 
Data sovereignty refers to the concept 
that digital information is subject to the laws 
of the country in which it is located. 
As data flows across borders, understanding and complying 
with the varying data protection regulations 
can be a complex task for organizations. 
In this lesson, we're going to explore 
the concept of data sovereignty 
and the geographical considerations that come into play. 
Data sovereignty is based on the principle 
that information is subject to the laws of the nation 
within which it is collected or processed. 
This means that a company must manage, 
store, and process the data according 
to the laws of that particular country. 
The concept has gained popularity 
with the emergence of cloud computing, 
where data is often stored in data centers located 
in different parts of the world. 
For example, GDPR protections are extended 
to any EU citizen while they're within the EU, 
or EEA, or the European economic area borders. 
Once they are out of the regions of the European Union, 
they're no longer protected by GDPR. 
Next up, geographical considerations. 

The geographical location of data storage and processing 
can have significant implications for businesses. 
Different countries have different laws 
and regulations concerning data protection, 
privacy, and cross-border data transfers. 
For instance, 
the European Union's General Data Protection Regulation, 
or GDPR as we previously mentioned, 
has stringent rules for data protection 
and grants individuals strong rights 
over their personal data. 
Any organization dealing with data of EU citizens, 
regardless of its location, 
must comply with these regulations. 
Non-compliance can result in hefty fines. 
On the other hand, countries like China and Russia 
has strict data sovereignty laws 
that require companies to store and process data 
within their national borders. 
These laws can pose challenges 
for multinational companies that operate 
in multiple jurisdictions and use cloud services 
for data storage and processing. 
Understanding where your data resides 
and where it's processed is crucial, 
this includes knowing the physical locations 
of your data centers and the flow of data across borders. 
You need to ensure that information 
is not illegally transferred 
from a particular privacy jurisdiction without consent. 
Another scenario that you should be aware of 
is that sometimes employees might need access 
from multiple geographical locations, 
which cloud-based services can sometimes restrict. 
In conclusion, data sovereignty 
and its geographical considerations present 
a complex challenge 
for organizations operating in the digital age. 
However, with careful planning, legal advice 

and strategic use of technology, 
organizations can navigate this landscape successfully, 
ensuring compliance 
and protecting their valuable data assets. 
 
 
Video 7 Securing Data (OBJ 3.3) 
 
Securing Data. 
In today's digital age, 
data security is a top priority for organizations worldwide. 
As threats continue to evolve, so too must the strategies 
and techniques used to safeguard valuable data. 
In this lesson, we're going to jump into the various methods 
used to secure data, including geographic restrictions, 
encryptions, hashing, masking, 
tokenization, obfuscation, segmentation, 
and permission restrictions. 
First, geographic restrictions. 
Geographic restrictions, also known as geofencing, 
involve setting up virtual boundaries 
to restrict data access based on the geographic location. 
This method can help organizations comply 
with data sovereignty laws 
and prevent unauthorized access from high-risk locations. 
For example, if all my employees 
are located within the Americas, 
I can simply ban any login requests originating 
from Asia or Africa 
as my users can never be logging in from those locations. 
Second, encryption. 
Encryption is a fundamental data security method 
that transforms readable data, plaintext, 
into unreadable data or ciphertext 
using an algorithm and an encryption key. 
Only those with the corresponding decryption key 
can revert the data back to its original form. 
Encryption is crucial for protecting data at rest 
and data in transit. 

Third, hashing. 
Hashing is a technique that converts data 
into a fix ed size of numerical 
or alphanumeric characters, known as the hash value. 
Unlike encryption, hashing is a one-way function. 
Once data is hashed, it cannot be reversed or decrypted. 
Hashing is often used to store sensitive data 
like passwords, and it's also used 
to check the integrity of files. 
Next up, masking. 
Data masking involves replacing some 
or all of the data in a field with a placeholder, such as X, 
to conceal the original content. 
It can be done partially to keep some metadata for analysis. 
For instance, in a phone number 
the area code might be kept, 
but the rest of the number is replaced. 
Data masking can also maintain 
the original format of the field. 
Once data is masked, it's a one-way process 
so it can't be reversed, 
making it a method of de-identification. 
Next up, tokenization. 
Tokenization replaces sensitive data 
with non-sensitive substitutes, known as tokens. 
The original data is stored securely in a separate database 
with a token serving as a reference to the original data. 
Tokenization is commonly used in payment processing systems 
to protect credit card information. 
Next up, obfuscation. 
Obfuscation involves making data unclear or unintelligible, 
making it difficult for unauthorized users to understand. 
This can involve various techniques, such as encryption, 
data masking, and the use of pseudonyms. 
Next up, segmentation. 
Segmentation involves dividing a network 
into separate segments, each with its own security controls. 
This means that even if a cyber criminal gains access 
to one segment, they cannot move laterally 

to other parts of the network. 
This limits the potential damage of a breach. 
Finally, permission restrictions. 
Permission restrictions involve defining who has access 
to specific data and what they can do with it. 
This is often managed through access control list 
or role-based access control, often known as RBAC, 
by limiting access to only those who need it. 
Organizations can significantly reduce the risk 
of internal data breaches. 
So in conclusion, securing data 
is a tedious but rewarding process 
that requires a combination of techniques, 
tailored to an organization's specific needs 
and the nature of the data they handle. 
By implementing a robust mix of geographic restrictions, 
encryption, hashing, masking, 
tokenization, obfuscation, segmentation, 
and permission restrictions, 
organizations can protect their valuable data assets 
from both internal and external threats. 
 
 
Video 8 Data Loss Prevention (DLP) (OBJ 4.4) 
 
Data loss prevention. 
Data loss prevention is set up to monitor the data 
of a system while it's in use, in transit, or at rest. 
It does this in order to detect any attempts 
to steal the data. 
Let's think about when we had data 
stored 20 or 30 years ago, 
where did they store most of it? 
Well, most businesses stored it, 
print it off and in a filing cabinet. 
And if someone wanted to get that, 
they'd have to break into your offices, 
open the filing cabinet 
and physically take the files. 

This limited the amount 
of information that somebody could steal from you 
because they really could only steal 
what they could carry with them. 
Then we started allowing people to work remotely 
and a lot of the data was stored on laptops. 
If you happen to stop for a lunch 
and you left your laptop sitting in your car, 
somebody could have broken 
into your car and stolen your laptop, 
and they now have access to all the data that was on it. 
The next evolution in data theft occurred when 
we started using external hard drives. 
These started being used all throughout our offices. 
These hard drives could hold large amounts of data. 
We could plug it into the network 
through our laptop, 
and download a ton of information and data. 
Then could walk out of the building with it, 
but these were kind of large and easy to detect. 
Next, we started seeing thumb drives that hold just as much 
as these external hard drives, 
carrying billions of documents out the front door 
without no one knowing it 
because they're so small and fit right into your pocket. 
But wait, we don't even need to do that nowadays 
because we have things like Dropbox 
and Google Drive where we get terabytes 
of storage available to you hooked up to the network, 
and I could sit there and upload everything your company has 
and get access to it anywhere in the world. 
This is a huge problem for businesses because our data 
and our intellectual property is what the currency 
of business is these days. 
To protect it, we have to use data loss prevention systems. 
These systems come as either software or hardware solutions. 
The first data loss prevention system we're going to talk 
about is an endpoint DLP system. 
An endpoint system is usually a piece of software 

that is installed on a workstation or a laptop. 
It's going to monitor the data that's in use 
on the computer. 
If someone tries to do a file transfer, 
it'll either stop the file transfer 
or alert the admin of the occurrence 
based on certain rules and policies, 
very much like an IDS or IPS would, 
but focused on data. 
DLPs can be set to detection mode or prevention mode. 
The next one we have is a network DLP system. 
This is a piece of software hardware that is a solution 
placed at the perimeter of your network. 
A sole function in life is to check all of the data going 
into and out of your network with a special focus 
on things going out of the network. 
They want to detect data in transit 
that shouldn't be leaving the building. 
The third type we have is called storage DLP. 
This is a software that is installed on a server 
in the data centers 
and inspects the data while it's addressed 
on the server. 
This is usually 
because they've encrypted it or watermarked it, 
and we want to make sure that nobody is accessing the data 
at times that they shouldn't be. 
For example, if someone starts downloading large amounts 
of data at two in the morning, 
that's probably against your policy 
and the DLP could catch it. 
The fourth type of DLP is a cloud-based DLP system. 
These systems are usually offered 
as a software as a service solution, 
and that's a part of your cloud service and storage needs. 
They're going to protect your data when it's stored inside 
of those cloud services. 
For example, our company uses Google Drive 
and we have data loss prevention 

as part of a cloud service offered by Google. 
So in summary, 
these data loss prevention solutions are made to be accurate 
in a way that they stop data from leaving your network. 
They're going to go through and look at data at rest, 
data in use, and data in transit to ensure 
that it's following the policies you've 
set up as a security admin 
so you could protect the assets of your company. 
 
 
Video 9 Configuring a DLP (OBJ 4.5) 
 
In this lesson, 
I'm going to show you how to configure a DLP. 
For this demonstration 
we're going to be using the Google Suite 
which is known as Google Workspace 
to be able to configure a DLP for Google Drive, Google Chat, 
as well as Google Mail, which is Gmail. 
Now if you're using Office 365, it's a very similar process 
and I don't want you to worry too much 
about the exact specifics of what I'm doing 
but really focus on the concepts and how DLP works 
and is configured using the Setup Wizards. 
Now, from within Google Workspace, 
you're going to go to your admin panel, 
which is located at admin.google.com. 
This feature and functionality does not work 
on free Google accounts. 
This only works if you have a paid subscription to Google 
for their Google Workspace product 
at the enterprise or educational level. 
Now, the first thing we're going to do 
is we're going to configure it to be able to protect our chat 
and our Google Drive from having data loss happening 
by configuring a DLP solution there. 
To find that, we're simply going to go 
under security on the left menu bar 

and then we're going to hit the down arrow. 
We're going to click on access and data control 
and then we're going to go down to data protection. 
Once you click on data protection 
the data protection screen will load. 
From here, you can get information about your drive 
as well as your chats that are being blocked or not blocked 
based on the existing DLP solution. 
So you could see here, 
by default Google already has a DLP solution in place 
and it's looking for things like email addresses 
phone numbers, gender identity, 
and other things like that. 
You can notice here that we have 17.5% 
of our Drive files marked as being sensitive 
and being shared externally by their data type 
based on October 6th when we had the scan run last 
of all of our files, which has over 300,000 files. 
As you can see here, 
email addresses are by far the most common thing 
that are being flagged here in DLP 
because a lot of our stuff 
uses email addresses as an example 
like support@diontraining.com on some of our slides 
and things like that that we use in our classes. 
Now underneath this, 
you're going to see that we have different rules 
that are recommended for your organization. 
In this case, they're saying we should prevent 
sharing global email addresses 
and we can review that recommended rule 
and implement it if we wanted to. 
So for example, if I go over here 
and click on the "Review Recommended Rule," 
it will bring up the template for it, 
which is already configured 
and it's telling me, "Hey, this is already set up. 
"All you have to do is accept it or you can edit this rule." 
And what we're looking for here 

is anything that looks like an email address 
that's being sent outside of our organization. 
And for here we have the alerts disabled, 
Google Drive will give you a warning 
if you try to share something 
that contains this type of data, 
and we consider this to be a low sensitivity. 
Now, in our case, 
it is not a rule we have activated yet 
and if I wanted to set it to active, 
which is set up right here, 
I would simply click on the create button 
to put this rule into effect. 
Now, for our purposes, 
we are not worried about email addresses being sent out 
as part of our Google Drive files 
because again we use email addresses 
in almost everything we do 
and most of them are examples or dummy email addresses 
like test@test.com or support@diontraining.com 
which is one that we use a lot in our training materials. 
Let's go back and look at how we can configure our own rules 
for something more specific that we might want to protect. 
So from this screen, we're going to scroll down 
and you can see that we have "Manage Rules." 
We're going to click on that 
and this will allow us to set up our data protection rules. 
Right now you can see we have none available 
in our domain or in our account. 
So we want to add a rule 
to be able to create something to protect. 
So I'm going to go ahead and click on add a rule 
and I'm going to create a new rule. 
Now, when I create this new rule 
I'm going to give it a name 
and I'm going to call this "Block SSNs" 
because I want to block Social Security numbers. 
The description here is going to be 
"Configure DLP to prevent SSNs 

"from being shared in chat or Google Drive files. " 
All right? 
That way when we see a long list 
of hundreds of different DLP rules 
we know what this rule is designed to do, 
then you're going to choose your scope. 
Your scope is who in the organization does this apply to? 
By default, it's going to apply to everyone, 
but there may be certain things you want to set up 
for only certain groups of people. 
For example, I could set up a rule that says 
that none of my instructors can email out anything 
that looks like an exam question 
because we don't want our instructors 
taking our exam database and posting it online 
or in an open file like inside of Google Drive. 
So that might be a place where we only want 
a certain thing to be held under certain people, 
or we can create rules that have to do with finances 
and only our accounting department has those applied to them 
because in my courses I could talk about the fact 
that there is a credit card number 
or an amount of money, like $15, 
but on the accounting side 
we don't want those details getting out. 
And so these are the kind of things you can do 
when you want to have a smaller area. 
But for something like blocking Social Security numbers, 
it's probably a good idea 
to block all Social Security numbers 
because nobody should be sending those things around. 
So I'm going to use all in "Dion Training," 
then we're going to click on continue. 
And here we're going to say what is this going to apply to, 
which applications? 
Now from here, you can do it in two main places. 
One is Google Chat, 
and this is for the messages you send 
as well as the files you upload. 

And the other one is Google Drive 
for any files that are being added to Google Drive. 
In our case, we want both of these 
to be able to be checked to make sure 
that we're not sending out Social Security numbers. 
You'll notice when I click "file uploaded" under Google Chat 
it is going to use OCR or optical character recognition 
to also check any photographs that you upload 
because those could contain information too 
like a picture of your Social Security card. 
Next, we'll hit continue. 
And then here we're going to add our conditions. 
What kind of data do we want this rule 
to actually look for? 
Now, what am I going to scan? 
Is it all content or just certain content? 
In our case, I want everything to be scanned. 
And what am I scanning for? 
Well, you can use matching predefined data types. 
You can create a text string, 
you can create a match for a regular expression 
or you can match words from a word list. 
So for example, maybe I'm working 
on a top secret project called "Operation Neptune" 
and I want to make sure that never gets out of my organization. 
Well, I can set up a rule here 
that matches the words from a list 
or contains a text string of "Operation Neptune" 
and if I see those words, I will block that message. 
Now, in our case 
we're trying to block Social Security numbers 
and that is one of the predefined data types. 
So I'm just going to select that. 
As you go through this list, 
they are in alphabetical order 
based on predefined data types for different countries. 
So I'm in the United States, 
so I'm going to scroll all the way down to the U.S. 
and under the U.S. I'm going to find the one 

that says Social Security number. 
Notice there's a lot of other things in here 
like state names, taxpayer identifications, 
passports different ID numbers, 
like the German ID number or the Australian ID number, 
your driver's license, your phone numbers, 
your addresses, all that kind of stuff. 
But for us, we worry about the Social Security numbers 
so we're going to go ahead and click on that. 
Then we're going to assign a likely threshold. 
Where do we want actions to start happening 
whether those are logging, whether those are alerting, 
whether that is notifying the user that they're doing it 
or is it blocking it all together? 
Regardless of what action we're going to take, 
we first have to define 
when is the likely threshold going to apply. 
Now, if you set it to something like very low 
you are going to get a ton of false positives 
and lots of things are going to be blocked 
that shouldn't be blocked. 
So I wouldn't recommend doing that. 
Generally, if it's something 
like a Social Security number or a phone number, 
I will set it to high or very high. 
Some people will go down as far as medium, 
but for me, I like to set it at least at high. 
Otherwise, you're going to have a lot of false positives 
and a lot of work for you to look through. 
And then you're going to look 
at the minimum number of unique matches 
and the minimum match count. 
And both of these cases, 
one is set as the default value, 
so I'm going to go ahead and leave that there. 
Now we have this set up 
to search for US-based Social Security numbers. 
If we have a high or very high likelihood of a match 
we will then take some action. 

So we can tick on continue. 
We'll now define what action that is 
and we're going to do this for each of those two applications. 
First, we have Google Chat. 
If somebody types in a Social Security number 
in Google Chat, what do we want to happen? 
Do we want to warn the user? 
Do we want to block the message or do we want to audit? 
Which means we're just going to log that thing 
and tell our system administrators about it. 
Again, 
depending on what you're trying to accomplish with DLP 
you want to make a decision based on what you're going to do. 
In our case, I want to block the message 
'cause I don't want people 
sending Social Security numbers over chat. 
And so we'll just go ahead and hit block message. 
Now, from here 
you'll select all the things it's going to apply to. 
Does it apply to internal or external conversations, 
spaces, chats, or one-on-one chats 
and things like that? 
And in addition to that, 
you can also give a message to your user 
if they're being warned or blocked. 
So in my case, I'm going to use a custom message 
that says "Your message may contain sensitive content like," 
I'm going to put "a Social Security number 
"that shouldn't be shared 
"based on your organization's policies. 
"Edit as needed, check your admin if it doesn't seem right." 
Okay? 
And then we also are going to set this up for Google Drive. 
And here if I have a file 
with something that looks like a Social Security number, 
do I want to block external sharing? 
Warn on external sharing 
or disable download, print and copying 
for commenters and viewers? 

In our case, I'm going to go ahead and block external sharing 
because I don't want any files with Social Security numbers 
being sent outside of our organization. 
And then we have alerting. 
When the event matches this rule criteria 
the event is going to be reported in the security dashboard 
and the alert center if applicable. 
What level of events should it be reported under? 
If this rule fir es, is this considered a low event 
or is this considered a medium or a high event? 
Well, because we're talking about data getting out 
and this isn't the most critical of data 
we probably want to have this set as something like a medium. 
But again, this is a risk-based decision 
that your organization will come to. 
And then in addition to that, 
you can also send to the alert center 
by sending additional detailed analysis 
so your system administrators are able to go ahead 
and take care of this issue. 
And in addition to that, you can also email them 
but we're not going to do that 
because we're going to let our cybersecurity workforce 
take care of going through all those alerts 
and taking care of those themself. 
And then we'll hit continue. 
And from here you see all the details 
of what we just configured 
and then we're going to go all the way to the bottom 
and then we will set it to be active. 
Now this rule is in effect, 
and if somebody tries to upload a file 
with a Social Security number 
or tries to send a Social Security number over Google Chat, 
it will be blocked and it will then take the actions 
that we specified in this rule. 
Now the second thing we need to set up is one for Gmail. 
Gmail is located in a separate place 
but it's still underneath this admin dashboard. 

To access it, 
we're going to go on the left side under admin, 
we're going to click on apps, 
and then we're going to go to Google Workspace 
and then we're going to click on Gmail 
which is located about halfway down. 
Once you're there, you're going to go down 
and scroll on the right-hand side 
all the way down to "Compliance." 
And under "Compliance," you will find our DLP features. 
Now from here, we have this turned on for everyone 
and right now you can see the email and chat auto deletion 
is currently not set. 
Optical character recognition is turned on, 
comprehensive mail storage is turned on. 
And then we have other things as we go down. 
Now, as we go down towards the bottom, 
we are going to be able to see 
that there's one called content compliance 
and that is what they call DLP inside of Gmail. 
So what we're going to do is hit "Configure" 
and from here we're going to say what is required? 
What are we going to call this? 
So we're going to say 
this is "Blocking SSNs being sent by email." 
And then we're going to say, what is it going to affect? 
Well, I just said we're sending it. 
So we're going to set this as an outbound rule. 
If somebody wants to send me 
an inbound Social Security number, we'll accept it 
but we're not going to be responsible for sending those out. 
Then we're going to add an expression 
that describes the content we want to search for. 
And again, there are all of these preset things 
that we can use. 
We can use a simple content match, 
an advanced content match 
a metadata match or predefined content. 
In our case, we're going to use predefined content. 

And it already selected United States Social Security number 
for me by default, 
probably because that is what we just used 
in the other rule. 
So it's guessing that's probably what I want. 
And then you'll see it also has a confidence threshold here 
and we could set that again 
from high, medium, low, et cetera. 
I personally liked it to have a high threshold. 
So I'm going to set that there 
and then I'm going to hit save. 
Now from here, I can scroll down 
and we can see if any of the expressions above match. 
What action do we want to have? 
Do we want to modify the message? 
Do we want to route it? 
Do we want to mark it as spam? 
Do we want to deliver it to somebody else? 
Do we want to encrypt it? 
All sorts of different options that we can choose. 
And if you go here 
you can also reject the message, 
quarantine the message, et cetera. 
So in this case, we might quarantine the message 
anytime we find a Social Security number 
and then we can notify the sender 
when the mail is quarantined 
so they know, hey, we have not sent this email out 
because it's in quarantine 
and they know that the other person they sent it to 
is not going to get that message. 
And then we can hit save. 
And from here we now have a new rule 
that's been applied here in content compliance. 
That's it. 
Now at this point, we have two rules set up. 
We have one that's set up for our chat and our Google Drive 
to help prevent something sensitive 
like a Social Security number from being sent. 

And we've also set the same thing inside of Gmail. 
Now, the last thing I want to bring up 
is this thing called the "data loss prevention" demo 
that Google gives you access to inside of your account. 
In here you actually could see 
a sample email message up top. 
Notice we have the welcome text 
and it's all this information. 
At the bottom, we have what they call the "Findings." 
So using this sample, we can see on line fiv e, 
for example strings like this one 
produce a phone number finding. 
"Please call me. 
"My phone number is 5552530000." 
If you look down below 
the first finding is a very likely high 
and the string was 5552530000. 
So this says, "Yes, this was a phone number 
"we believe it's a phone number." 
And looking at this, 
we believe it's a phone number too. 
As we go through the rest of this, 
you'll see that it's parsing the information 
to find any kind of information that it thinks is there 
like email addresses, credit card numbers, 
domain names and things like that. 
And as we scroll through here, 
you'll probably see a couple of those, 
like the email address, right here, 
like the credit card number, right here, 
like the National Provider Identity, right here. 
And you'll see that's down here as well 
with these highly likely 
as either a U.S. driver's license 
or a healthcare ID. 
And you have all the kind of information as you go through. 
Now, if I go in here and I add something, 
for example, and I say something like, 
"This is my Social Security number," 

and I put something like 432-12-1234, 
you'll now see, down below, 
the second finding is a U.S. Social Security number 
and is very likely high. 
And it thinks that that is a Social Security number 
because it takes the Social Security number format 
of three digits, then two digits, then four digits. 
Now, if I take out the words "Social Security" 
in front of the number, 
you're going to notice that the one at the bottom 
is no longer going to recognize this as a high likelihood 
of being a Social Security number. 
And here you'll see 
that Social Security dropped off our "Findings." 
But if I go a little bit further down, 
you'll see it will show up again down here, 
but now it's unlikely and low. 
Why is that? 
Well, because it's just a nine digit number 
separated by some dashes, 
and they don't know if it's something 
like an identification number 
a Social Security number, 
an employee ID or anything else. 
It's just a number at this point. 
Now, if I take away the word number 
and I type in SSN, 
again, you'll notice that the Social Security number 
is going to pop right back up as very likely. 
Now, the other thing I've noticed in this 
is if you play with some numbers like 123-45-6789, 
this is still showing up as a Social Security number 
because it's in that format and has the word SSN. 
But again, if I take this away, 
"my identification number," 
now, you'll see it's going to go away from that 
and it's going to look like something else. 
And now it's a possible medium for Social Security 
instead of a low or a high, 

based on what it's seeing. 
So this is a great way 
to play with your data loss prevention tool 
and see what will and what will not get caught 
based on this system. 
For example, if I type something like "jason@diontraining 
and don't put the ".com," 
it's probably not going to realize 
that that is actually an email, 
and it doesn't. 
Instead of being an email 
they think it is my person's name 
but my name is not jason@diontraining, 
it's Jason Dion. 
And so that's the way that this DLP stuff works. 
It's scanning it, it's looking at context, 
it's looking at what you've chosen 
and it's figuring out what should be blocked 
or what should not be blocked 
based on the rules you set up 
in your data loss prevention system. 
 
--- END unit-7 ---

